
PROFESSOR: Let's reconsider the restaurant project
we studied in question one.
Suppose that to run the restaurant
you need $190,000 each year in net working capital.
This working capital consists of food and beverage stock
and the associated supply chain needed
to produce and serve meals.
You're required to make this investment in the year zero.
In the year 10, you expect to close
the restaurant, at which point the net working capital will
go down to $0.
Does this change your decision on
whether you should open this restaurant or not?
Let's set net working capital requirements to the restaurant
project we considered in question one.
To run this restaurant, we're required
to have $190,000 in net working capital each year,
starting in the year zero and ending in year nine.
In year zero, we will close the restaurant,
and the working capital will go down to zero.
Let's start by adding these requirements to line six
in the spreadsheet.
In year zero, we're required to have $190,000
in net working capital.
These requirements are the same all the way through year nine,
and in the year 10, since we're closing down the restaurant,
the working capital goes down to $0.
Next, we compute the year-over-year changes
in net working capital.
So in year zero-- we'll assume that before year zero
we had nothing in net working capital,
so therefore, since the requirements in year zero
are $190,000, our increase is $190,000 in year zero.
In subsequent years, we're computing the increases
by taking the difference between this year
and the previous year, so for example, in year one,
the increase in net working capital
is $0 because the net working capital
requirements are the same in the year zero and the year one.

So the increase will be $0 all the way through year nine,
and in the year 10, the working capital
is going to decrease by $190,000 because the net working capital
requirements in the year 10 are $0.
And in the year nine, they were $190,000,
so therefore the net working capital
decreased by $190,000 between the year nine and 10.
Now in line eight, I will use the definition
of after-tax cash flow to compute after-tax cash flows
every year.
By definition, it is 1 minus tax rate--
recall that the tax rate is 21%--
multiplied by operating profit minus capital expenditures
plus depreciation tax shield, which is computed by tax rate
multiplied by depreciation expense minus increase
in net working capital.
And so in year zero, the cash flows are negative $840,000.
In all of the subsequent years, these
are the after-tax cash flows.
Note that in years one through year nine
the after-tax cash flows are exactly the same
as we had in question one.
In the year 10, however, the after-tax cash flow
is higher by $190,000, so this is
the amount of the decrease in net working capital.
As the final step, I will compute the net present value
of this restaurant project, and we'll use the NPV function.
I used the cost of capital, cash flows from year one
through year 10, and I'm adding up the after-tax cash
flow in year zero.
And the net present value is negative $3,284.
Turns out, net working capital requirements
make the NPV of this project negative,
and therefore we should not open this restaurant.
Conceptually, it is the timing of cash flows associated
with the working capital that makes
such a significant difference in this case.
We're required to spend additional $190,000
in year zero, which we only get back in year 10.
Given the discount rate of 10%, the time value of $190,000
is significant enough to turn the NPV of this project
negative.
