
PROFESSOR: Consider a project that
requires an investment of $30,000 in Year 0.
This project is expected to generate
cash flows of $4,600 over the next 10 years.
What is the internal rate of return, or IRR,
of this project?

First, let's learn how to build an NPV profile for a given
project.
By definition, NPV profile is a graph
of a project's NPV over a range of discount rates.
In our case, if the discount rate is r,
the net present value of this project
is negative $30,000, which is the initial investment,
plus $4,600 divided by r, multiplied by 1 minus 1
divided by 1 plus r raised to the power 10.
Here we are using the formula that
computes the present value of an annuity that
pays $4,600 each year for 10 years starting in Year 1.
Now let's use Excel to compute this NPV for a range
of discount rates, r.
In the spreadsheet, I have built in an array of discount rates
starting from 0.25% all the way to 15% with increments
of a quarter of a percent.
Now, for each of these discount rates,
I will compute the net present value of our project.
So starting for 0.25%, the net present value
equals to the initial investment plus annual cash flow divided
by this discount rate multiplied by 1 minus 1 divided by 1
plus discount rate raised to the power 10.

So in this case, if the discount rate is 0.25%,
the net present value of our project is $15,374.
Now, let me fix the cells, B3 and B4,
so that I can stretch this array all the way down.
And it'll automatically compute the net present value
of this project for all of these discount rates.

Now, recall that by definition, NPV profile
is a graph of a project's NPV for a range of discount rates.
So let's plot NPV against discount rates.
I am going to select both arrays and build this graph.

What we see is that for this project,
the NPV profile is a convex downward-sloping line.
It intersects x-axis around 8.75% mark.
Recall that by definition, the internal rate of return,
or IRR, is the discount rate that makes NPV of the project
equal to 0.
Therefore, the major benefit of building the NPV profile
is to gauge what the internal rate of return for a given
project is.
In our case, internal rate of return
is somewhere around 8.75%.
Note that this is not the exact solution yet.
We will learn two ways of finding
the exact solution for the internal rate of return now.
The first method of finding the internal rate of return
is to use Goal Seek function in Excel.
This function numerically solves equations.
To use this function, we need to compute
the net present value of project for any given discount rate.
This initial discount rate is often referred to
as an initial guess.
So I will set it 0.25%.
And let's compute the net present value
for this initial guess.
Net present value equals to the initial investment amount
plus the annual cash flow divided
by the initial guess multiplied by 1 minus 1 divided by 1
plus the discount rate raised to the power 10.
So if the discount rate is 0.25%,
the NPV is $15,374, same as we had before.
Now, let's use Goal Seek function.
We're going to Data tab, What-If Analysis, Goal Seek.
Goal Seek allows us to vary or to find the discount rate that
would set the net present value to any value that we want.
Now, since we are trying to find internal rate of return,
we want to set this cell, D9, where the NPV is
to 0 by changing this cell.
So we want to find the net present value that
would equal to 0 by changing the initial guess that we
set for a discount rate.
When we press OK button, Excel solves this equation
and finds the discount rate that sets the NPV of this project
to 0.
In this case, the discount rate that sets NPV to 0
is 8.64%, which, by definition, is the internal rate of return
of this project.

Goal Seek function is a useful tool that
allows you to solve any nonlinear equation in Excel.
The second method that we'll learn
how to find internal rate of return
just simply utilizes the IRR function in Excel.
Through this function, we need to enter all cash flows
that our project generates.
We'll start with the Year 0 where
we have the outflow of $30,000.
And then for the subsequent years, from Year 1
until Year 10, our project returns $4,600 every year.
Now, in this area, we have all of the cash flows
that this project generates.
To find its internal rate of return, we use IRR function.
So we type IRR.
And then we simply select the entire array in which
we have our cash flows.
There is a second parameter that is
required for the IRR function.
It's an optional parameter.
In some complicated cases, it does matter.
In our case, it does not.
We can put 0 here and hit Enter.
This function tells us the internal rate
of return of this project is 8.64%,
the same IRR that we got from using Goal Seek function.

The second part of this question asks,
if the cost of capital for this project is 9%,
should you take it?
We have found that the internal rate of return of this project
is 8.64%.
Now, let's recall the IRR rule, which
states we should invest only if the internal rate of return
of a project is higher than its cost of capital.
In our case, the internal rate of return of 8.64%
is less than 9%, which is the cost of capital
for this project.
Therefore, we should not take it.
To confirm, let us also compute the net present value
of this project given its cost of capital.
If the cost of capital is 9%, the NPV of this project
is negative $479.
NPV of this project is negative.
Therefore, we should not take it.
Both IRR and NPV investment decision rules in this case
agree.
