
PROFESSOR: Rio Tinto is considering the development
of a bauxite mine.
Development costs are estimated to be $24 million in year zero.
The mine will generate 4 million in cash flows
over the next 10 years, starting in year 1
and ending in year 10.
After that, Rio Tinto is planning to close the mine
and to bring the site in compliance
with environmental laws.
The estimated costs of closing and compliance
are expected to be $350,000 per year starting in year 11
and continuing in perpetuity.
Assume that the cost of capital is 8%.
The first question asks find the internal rate
of return of this project.
Should you invest in this project based on the IRR rule?
Let's start by entering given information
into the spreadsheet.
In year 0 we have to spend $24 million to develop the mine.
In years 1 through 10, the mine will generate $4 million
per year.
Starting in year 11 we have to spend $350,000 or 0.35 million
per year in compliance costs.
First, let's write down the NPV of this project as a function
of discount rate r.
It equals to negative 24 million,
which is the initial investment, plus the second term, which
captures present value of positive cash flows
that the project generates in years 1 through 10.
This is a simple annuity that pays 4 million
each year for 10 years.
The last term captures compliance costs,
it is a perpetuity that starts in year 11.
We can use the perpetuity formula
to find its value in year 10, which is 0.35 divided by r
and then we discount this value to present.

Now to find the internal rate of return
we need to set this NPV to 0 and solve this equation for r.
Now obviously we cannot do this by hand because this is
a linear equation of high dimension.
We also cannot use IRR formula that we used in previous
question because we're dealing with perpetuity and therefore
cannot enter the entire stream of cash flows into an array.
In other words, we just cannot enter an infinite array here
in Excel.
Therefore we need to utilize Goal Seek tool.
Let's start with initial guess for IRR, say 1%.
Given this 1% I will compute the net present value
of this project.
I will break down this calculation
into three parts, the initial investment, the annuity part
and the perpetuity part.
The initial investment simply equals to negative 24 million.
The annuity part equals to 4, divided
by r, multiplied by 1 minus 1, divided by 1 plus r,
raised to the power 10.

And the perpetuity part equals to 0.35, divided by r,
and this entire expression is divided or discounted
to present at discount rate r.

Now the NPV of the project is the sum
of these three components.

Now to find the internal rate of return,
I go to Data, What If Analysis, Goal Seek, so I
set the cell or the NPV to 0, remember
that internal rate of return is the discount rate
r that sets this NPV to 0, by changing
the cell of our initial guess.

So Excel solves this for us and gives us
the solution that the internal rate of return for this project
equals to 2.48%.
Now given that the cost of capital is 8%
and the internal rate of return is
less than the cost of capital, the conventional internal rate
of return rule would imply that we should not
take this project.
The second part of this question asks
us to find the net present value and asks
whether we should invest in this project based on the NPV rule.
Well the NPV of this project is simply this expression,
it is the same expression that we just
used to find internal rate of return
but here we're just using the cost of capital of 8%.
Turns out that the net present value of this project
is $814,000, therefore Rio Tinto should go ahead
with this project.
This contradicts the answer that we
received based on the internal rate of return rule.
So what gives?
To understand what's going on let's
build an NPV profile of this project.
I have created an array of discount rates from 2% to 15%
in quarter of a percent increments.
For each of these discount rates let's
compute the net present value.
I'm using here the same formula as the one we just used.
I will extend this array which will automatically
compute the net present value for all discount rates
that we have here.
Now what we see on the graph is the NPV profile
of this project.
Recall that in question 5 NPV profile was a decreasing
function of discount rates.
What we see here is a very different picture,
NPV profile is first increasing and then decreasing
in discount rates.
We visually see that when discount rate is
8%, which is our cost of capital,
the net present value of this project is positive
and therefore we should take this project.

To understand why IRR rule gave us the wrong investment advice
recall the following, IRR rule can be used only
when cash outflow occurs only in time 0,
only one project is under consideration,
opportunity cost of capital is the same for all periods
and the threshold rate is set to the cost of capital.
In our case, cash outflow occurs in year 0
as well as from year 11 onwards.
Therefore, we cannot use the internal rate of return rule
to make an investment decision in this case.
Let me make another remark, the NPV profile
here shows that this project has two internal rates of return.
The first one is somewhere between 2% and 3%
and the second one is somewhere around 9%
but when we used Goal Seek tool it gave us only one solution.
The reason for this is the initial guess or the starting
point.
Our first initial starting point was
1% and the numerical algorithm that
solved this equation converged to the first solution here,
which was 2.48%.
But if we started from a different initial guess
or initial starting point anywhere to the right
from this hump, say at 6%, we would have
converged to the second IRR.
To confirm this, let's go back to the other spreadsheet
and use Goal Seek tool with the starting point of 6%.
So in this initial guess cell I will put 6%
and I will go back to Goal Seek tool
and I will ask it to set the net present value of this project
to 0 by changing the discount rate cell.
And if we solve this equation from a different starting
point, we see that the algorithm here
converged to this second internal rate of return,
which is 9.04% in this case.
The conclusion is that this project has two IRRs
and we can find both of them using numerical tools in Excel.
But what's more important is that we cannot use the internal
rate of return rule to make the investment decision in this
case because the conditions under which we can use the IRR
rule are not satisfied, namely in this case,
we have cash outflows that occur after year zero.
In particular, the compliance costs that start in year 11
and continue onwards.
