
PROFESSOR: Now is year zero.
You're considering opening a new concept restaurant.
Last year, you have hired a consulting company
to help you evaluate your business idea.
The consulting company charged you $125,000,
and turned in the following operating projections
for the next 10 years.
Annual revenue is expected to be $270,000,
and will start in year one.
Annual expenses will also start in year one,
and are expected to be $130,000.
In year zero, you will make capital investments,
which primarily include restaurant equipment,
totaling $650,000.
This equipment will be depreciated
using straight line depreciation method over the next 10 years.
The appropriate cost of capital is 10%.
And the current tax rate is 21%.
Your goal is to determine whether you should
open this restaurant or not.
Let's solve this question.
We are asked to evaluate whether we
should open the new restaurant.
To make this decision, we should use the net present value
rule, which states that we should
invest if the net present value is positive.
The net present value is defined as the sum of project's cash
flows discounted to present using appropriate discount
rates.
Therefore, to compute the net present value,
we first should compute project's cash flows.
Cash flows are defined as 1 minus tax rate times operating
profit minus capital expenditures plus tax rate
times depreciation minus change in working capital.
Tax rate times depreciation is known as the depreciation tax
shield, which arises due to the fact
that depreciation is a tax deductible expense.
Notice that in this question we are not
given any information regarding working capital requirements
of running the restaurant.
Therefore, we will assume that changes in the working capital
are zero.
In this case, cash flows can be computed
as 1 minus tax rate times operating profit minus capital
expenditures plus depreciation tax shield.
Let's record all of the given information
into the spreadsheet and use it to compute
the net present value of this project.
Consulting fees of $125,000.
Annual revenue is $270,000.
Expenses are $130,000.
And capital expenditures, which I abbreviate here as CapEx,
are $650,000.
Tax rate is 21%.
Cost of capital is 10%.
The question tells us that the restaurant will start
generating revenue in year one.
And this revenue will continue every year from year one
until year 10.

Expenses also start in year one.
And similar to revenue, they continue all the way
through year 10.
Now, knowing revenue and expenses,
we can compute operating profit, which
equals to the difference between revenue and expenses.
So therefore, every year from year one
through year 10 operating profit equals to $140,000.
Now, next, we need to compute annual depreciation expense.
The question tells us that capital assets
will be depreciated using straight line depreciation
method over the next 10 years.
So therefore, to compute the annual depreciation expense,
we're taking capital expenditure,
and we're dividing it by 10.
So therefore, every year, depreciation expense
would equal to $65,000.
Capital expenditures occur only in year zero.
That's when we buy restaurant equipment.
Now, knowing operating profit, depreciation capital
expenditure, we can compute after tax cash flow.
Recall that by definition of the tax cash flow equal to 1
minus tax rate, which is 21% in this case, multiplied
by operating profits minus capital
expenditure plus depreciation tax shield,
which equals to the tax rate multiplied by depreciation
expense.

And so in year zero, after tax cash flow
equals to negative $650,000.
In all the subsequent years, in year one through year 10,
after tax cash flow equals to $124,250.
Now, the final step to compute the net present value,
we need to discount all of these cash flows to present.
To discount these cash flows to present,
we're taking the cash flow, and we're dividing it
by 1 plus cost of capital raised to the power which
equals to the year when this cash flow occurs.

So these are the discounted cash flows.
And the net present value simply equals to the sum
of the discounted cash flows.

So the net present value here equals to $113,462.
Now, what about consulting fees?
Since we paid these fees last year, they are sunk.
And we should not take them into account
when making our decision whether to open the restaurant or not.
Since the net present value is positive $113,462,
we should go ahead and open the restaurant.
Now, let me also teach you how to use
the NPV function in Excel to directly compute
the net present value.
The function NPV takes the first argument
as the discount rate, which in our case
is the cost of capital.
And the values are all of the cash flows
that start from year one onwards.
So remember, because we're using NPV function,
we're just taking the cash flows that are not discounted.
So the function will discount these cash flows for us.
If we also subtract the initial investment of $650,000,
this calculation should equal to the net present value, which
we computed by just summing up the cash flows
that we discounted ourselves.
So the two results are identical.
You might have thought of a more compact way
of solving this problem.
Since every year, starting in year one
and ending in year 10, revenue, expenses, and depreciation
expense are constant, after-tax cash flows
have to be constant as well.
They equal to 1 minus tax rate, which
is 21%, times operating profit, which
is $140,000, plus depreciation tax shield, which altogether
equals to $124,250.
We can compute the present value of these cash flows
from year one through year 10 using the annuity formula
as follows.
$124,250 divided by 10%, which is our cost of capital,
multiplied by 1 minus 1 divided by 1 plus 10%,
again, our cost of capital, raised to the power of 10,
which equals the number of periods.
This equals to $763,462.
Given the initial investment of $650,000,
the net present value equals to $113,462, exactly the number
that we obtained before.
Notice how much faster we were able to solve this
question by utilizing the annuity formula.
Keep this in mind and use this approach whenever possible,
especially on the exam.
