
JOHN CORE: In this session, we're
going to talk about accounting for banks.
The banking industry is really interesting
but somewhat different.
So we've been focusing on industrial firms.
So we talked about AT&T, we talked about Hertz,
we talked about Amazon and Walmart.
So these are all industrial firms.
What we want to now do in this session
is extend these accounting concepts
to a much different industry, which is the banking industry.
The goal of this session is to give you
an overview of the banking industry.
We're going to review and understand
a couple of prior concepts.
So we're going to, again, talk about how,
as you take on more leverage, that's
going to cause your return on equity to go up,
other things being equal.
So that's the DuPont formula that we talked
about several sessions ago.
And then we're also going to take
the concept of the allowance for bad debts
that we talked about in an earlier session
and extend this to an allowance for loan losses, which
is one of the major accounting concepts for banks.
So while these two concepts, DuPont method and the allowance
accounting, are likely going to be on the exam.
The remaining material that we're talking about for banks
is for your interest and it's not going to be on the exam.

So as a little bit of background,
here's the S&P 500 sector ratings
given to us by Seeking Alpha.
And you notice that the box shows the financials.
Just before the financial crisis,
financials were about 22% of the value of the S&P 500.
During the crisis, they fell as low as 9%.
But right now, or at least in 2017,
they're back up to about 18%.
So financials are an important sector.
And it's important that we have some intuition about financials
as well as industrials.
So what we're going to do in this session, first of all,
I'm going to give you an overview of the form of bank
financial statements.
We'll look at some balance sheets and some income
statements.
Then we're going to review the relation between leverage
and return on equity using the DuPont method.
Then I might give you a little bit
of intuition for why banks need to be regulated,
so intuition for bank regulation.
And then intuition for why regulators focus heavily
on bank leverage, which they measure
with the equity-to-assets ratio.
Then we're going to briefly review marketable securities
accounting and talk about its application
to the banking industry.
Then we're going to finally review
the allowance for bad debt and extend
this concept to an allowance for bank loan losses.
And then the banking industry is going through a big accounting
change right now.
And that changes the accounting for loan losses.
And I'm going to discuss that with you
and then give some intuition for the differences
in the standards.
So one of my case study companies
is going to be Wells Fargo.
Wells Fargo is one of the four largest
banks in the United States.
And this is their December of 2018 balance sheet.
So notice that the top of the balance sheet
are cash and investment securities, which are about 41%
of Wells Fargo's balance sheet.
And the accounting for this is the passive investments
marketable securities accounting that we talked about a couple
of sessions ago.
Biggest asset for banks typically are loans,
so banks make loans.
And so for Wells Fargo, loans are about 50%
of their balance sheet.
Biggest liability for banks are deposits.
So your checking account is a deposit.
If you get a certificate of deposit, that's a deposit.
So the primary liability for banks are deposits.
Notice that the total liabilities
for this bank, Wells Fargo, is about 90% of assets.
So banks are very highly levered.
And stockholders' equity, by contrast, is only about 10%
of assets.
So Wells Fargo, again, is one of the biggest banks in the US.
It's got about $2 trillion worth of assets.
It's headquartered in California,
but it operates across the US and probably across the world.
I'm going to compare that with a very small regional bank, which
is United Financial.
It's got in 2018 about $7.5 billion worth of assets.
It's headquartered nearby, at least
nearby to me, in Connecticut.
And most of its operations are in Connecticut
and Massachusetts.
So when we compare the big bank, Wells Fargo,
with the small bank, United Financial,
a couple things stick out.
So in total, investment securities, cash, and loans
are about 90% of Wells Fargo's balance sheet.
And they're about 92% of United Financials' balance sheet.
So even though we have enormous differences in bank size here,
these balance sheets essentially look the same.
The big difference is that Wells Fargo
has more in investment securities
and United Financial has more in loans.
Part of that is because, as a bigger organization,
it's easier for Wells Fargo to sell off loans
and to invest instead in investment securities.
It's more difficult for a smaller organization
like United Financial to sell off its loans
and turn them into investment securities.
Notice that both organizations have about 70%
of their total liabilities and equity in deposits.
And again, both of them have very high leverage.
Total liabilities is 90% of liabilities and equity.
And stockholders' equity is only about 10%.
So even though there are great differences in sizes,
asset and liability composition of the two banks
is not greatly different.
Here's Wells Fargo's 2018 income statement.
And this income statement looks different than the ones
that we've been looking at.
So at the top is interest income.
So banks have interest income instead of sales revenue.
Next line is interest expense.
This is analogous to or akin to cost of goods sold.
Interest income minus interest expense is net interest income.
This is akin to gross margin.
Provision for credit losses is something
we're going to be focusing on in this session,
but it's a big expense for the bank.
Non-interest revenue is fees.
So if you bounce a check or something like that,
that's non-interest revenue for a bank.
The bank may have some wealth management operations.
And then some of the larger banks
have investment banking operations.
And then non-interest expense is compensation expense,
expense for running the building, et cetera,
which is analogous to selling, general,
and administrative expense.
And then we got income before income tax expense,
which we know about.
We got income tax expense.
And then we've got net income, which we're also familiar with.
Just quickly comparing Wells Fargo
to United Financial in terms of their income statements,
notice that both of them have net interest
income of about 70% or 77%.
In the case of Wells Fargo, the provision for credit losses
is 3% of their interest income for both of them.
Now big difference here is that Wells Fargo, the bigger bank,
has a lot more non-interest revenue.
They've probably got more wealth management operations.
They may be doing some investment banking as well.
And because of that, their non-interest expense
is much larger.
But nevertheless, in terms of net income,
Wells Fargo has a higher profit margin
than does United Financial.