
PROFESSOR: Here's the four largest US banks as of 2018,
so Bank of America, Citigroup, JP Morgan, and Wells Fargo.
So I notice they all have net income of about $25 billion.
Their assets are all roughly $2 trillion plus or minus.
Their stockholders' equity are $200 billion plus or minus.
Their return on assets, which is net income divided
by ending assets, is about 1%, which is
a fairly low return on assets.
And then the return on equity, which
is net income divided by ending stockholders' equity,
is roughly about 10% or 12%, which
is a reasonably healthy return on equity.
Now, recall from our earlier discussions,
DuPont analysis, which is an analysis of the drivers
of the return on equity.
So return on equity, which is net income divided
by ending stockholders' equity, can be decomposed into return
on assets, which is net income divided
by total assets multiplied by leverage,
which is total assets divided by stockholders' equity.
So there's two drivers there.
You could either have a high return on assets,
or you can take on a lot of leverage
if you want to have a high return on equity.
So looking at the four big US banks, the relation
between return on assets, bank leverage, and return on equity,
again, return on assets is fairly small.
It's about 1%.
But the way that these banks generate
a reasonably healthy return on equity is through leverage.
So they're all leveraged about 10 times.
So if you take a 1% return on assets, multiply that by 10,
you get sort of a 10% return on equity.
So they're generating their return on equity
through leverage rather than through return on assets.
In the balance sheet equation for banks then,
we've sort of already illustrated
this with Wells Fargo.
It's typically we've got assets which
are mainly loans, also marketable securities
and other assets.
Our liabilities are predominantly
deposits and other liabilities, but our liabilities
are about 90% of assets, and our shareholders' equity
are only about 10% of assets, which means that banks
are very highly levered.
So why that is, we're going to discuss this
in the next couple of slides.
The counterfactual is so when you think about,
what would happen if a sort of risky industrial company
like an Amazon or a Tesla, if it wanted to lever itself up 90%?
So it would go out, it would repurchase stock, issue debt,
keep issuing debt and keep repurchasing stock
until it reaches 90% leverage ratio.
Thing is here is the debt holders,
as you get more and more highly levered,
your debt is more and more risky,
and the debt holders would demand higher interest rates
on that higher risk debt, so they demand a risk premium.
So ultimately, the industrials, Tesla, in our example,
it could not actually get 90% leverage
because the interest rate on that incremental debt
would be too high.
So now we're going to talk about why
banks are so highly levered.
And to do this, we're going to give some intuition for bank
leverage and also give intuition for why
banks must be regulated.
So it's a fact that almost all countries
provide deposit insurance, OK?
So countries, in order to create wealth and protect people,
they give deposit insurance, and what deposit insurance means,
that at least in the US, if you take $250,000
and put it into a bank, the bank becomes insolvent,
which is another word for going bankrupt.
If the bank can't pay you your $250,000,
because the government insures those deposits,
the government will pay you your $250,000.
And when you think about this, what this means is
you don't really care about whether the bank is
risky or not, OK?
Because the government is the one that's insuring your debt.
So if the bank goes bankrupt, you're
going to get paid by the government.
So depositors see deposits as very low risk.
And because they think they're low risk,
they're not going to demand a risk premium.
So if you compare the rate on a five-year deposit
with a rate on a five-year corporate bond,
the rate on the five-year corporate bond
is going to be much higher because the corporate bond is
much riskier than a deposit, which is guaranteed
by the federal government.
So since deposits are low-cost, how
do banks want to finance themselves?
Well, remember, in economics, there's
this idea which is the free good is overconsumed.
So deposits are sort of like free financing or very low-cost
financing for banks, so banks want to get
as many deposits as possible.
They want to get as much leverage as possible.
And this means that they're taking
on a lot of financial risk because the more
leverage you have, the greater risk you bear.
So this, in turn, creates the need for bank regulation
because you can't have the banks willy-nilly sort of taking risk
with government deposits.
So the regulators have to be there to make sure
that the bankers are not taking on too much risk.

So how bank regulation works, then,
and this is broad intuition, there's obviously details
that we're going to skim over here,
but the big picture of bank regulation
is the regulators want to make sure
that the banks have enough capital, which is basically
stockholders' equity, so that if something goes bad,
there's enough stockholders' equity
there to absorb losses so the bank doesn't go
bankrupt or become insolvent.
The way that regulators think about capital,
it is basically shareholders' equity divided by assets.
And connecting to what we've been talking
about earlier in the course, notice that capital is just 1
over leverage, 1 divided by leverage,
so it's the inverse of leverage.
So if you got a lot of capital, you have low leverage.
If you have low capital, you have high leverage.
So the key issues here for regulation
is, how much capital should be required?
I'll go through some examples of this in a minute.
How are we going to define shareholders' equity?
Should we adjust shareholders' equity for things
like goodwill, which might not be valuable in bankruptcy
or insolvency?
And how should we adjust assets for things
that like goodwill that might not be valuable or insolvency?
Are our loan loss reserves adequate?
And we're going to talk about that in a couple of minutes.
So there's something in the US, and there's
something in other countries, but it's
called Regulatory Accounting Principles, or RAP, OK?
So regulatory accounting principles basically
take Generally Acceptable Accounting Principles, or GAAP,
and make adjustments so that they can be confident
that the capital number that they have
is a capital number that they can be confident of.
So we're not going to talk about RAP in particular here,
but the concept is is the regulators take US GAAP,
make adjustments to it using regulatory accounting
principles, or RAP.
So the big one is regulatory capital,
and I'm just going to call this adjusted GAAP
common stockholders' equity.

So in regulatory parlance in the US,
there's something called tier 1 capital,
and to compute tier 1 capital, you
take common stockholders' equity,
you subtract off some goodwill and intangibles,
and then you make some other adjustments to that.
So that's common equity adjusted to remove
goodwill and intangibles and making some other adjustments
as well.
And then our tier 1 leverage ratio
is going to be that tier 1 capital divided
by adjusted assets where we're also adjusting assets
with goodwill and intangibles and other things as well.
And in the US, the regulatory minimum for the tier 1 leverage
ratio is 4%.
So it's not exactly stockholder's equity to assets,
but stockholders' equity to assets
needs to be in the ballpark of 4%
based on this tier 1 leverage ratio.
The other big requirement is something called a tier
1 risk-based capital ratio.
So again, we're going to take our same tier 1 capital that we
computed at the top of the slide,
but instead of average assets, we're
going to use average risk-weighted assets.
And what risk-weighted assets are is
they're average assets where low-risk assets like government
bonds and some loans get a low weight,
and then high-risk assets like junk bonds and credit cards
get a high weight, OK?
So the minimum requirement for the risk-based capital ratio
is 10.5%.
And then JP Morgan's 2018 10-K gives a nice picture of this,
OK?
So it shows you how they take common stockholders' equity,
they take some deductions for goodwill,
they take some deductions for mortgage servicing
rights, which is a kind of intangible asset.
They're not going to allow deferred tax assets,
so that's another adjustment that
are associated with tax loss carryforwards,
and then they're going to add to this adjusted common equity
something called perpetual preferred stock.
So we've talked about preferred stock earlier.
A lot of preferred stock is like debt
in that it has a maturity date.
So you issue preferred stock, and it matures 20 years
from now.
Banks issue something called perpetual preferred stock,
which is much more like common equity.
So that preferred stock has no maturity date.
It stays outstanding forever unless it's repurchased,
and that's an additional capital buffer
that goes into JP Morgan's tier 1 capital.
So JP Morgan has a nice table in their 10-K in 2018.
It shows you their tier 1 capital
is a little over $200 billion.
Their adjusted average assets are about $2.6 trillion.
And if you take those two numbers
and divide them through each other,
that gives you JP Morgan's tier 1 leverage
ratio, which is 8.1%.
And then they've got a bunch of calculations
on risk-based capital.
One of them is a tier 1 risk-based capital ratio.
So we take our same tier 1 capital, which
is a little over $200 billion.
They do a computation of risk-based assets
so that risk-weighted assets for JP Morgan are $1.5 trillion.
So the risk-weighting is something
if you got something that's really risky that's got a risk
rating of 100%, but if you've got something
like cash that has essentially no risk, that
gets a risk rating of 0%.
So risk-weighted assets are going
to be smaller than average assets on the balance sheet.
Having computed those risk-weighted assets,
they take the ratio of tier 1 capital
to risk-weighted assets, and that gives them
their tier 1 capital ratio.