
PROFESSOR: So within this regulatory capital framework,
the basic issue in regulation is, does the bank
have enough capital?
Remember, capital is sort of adjusted common stockholders'
equity.
So what we're going to talk about later in this session is,
are allowances for loan losses adequate?
So you can imagine that if the asset, which is loans,
are overstated, then so is capital.
So an important regulatory issue is making sure
that loan loss reserves are appropriate.
Another important regulatory issue, especially
during the financial crisis, was are marketable securities,
and this includes mortgage-backed securities,
are those marketable securities accurately valued?
So if you remember, during the crisis, a lot of banks
bought something called collateralized mortgage
obligations, and the rating agencies mistakingly
rated those collateralized mortgage obligations as AAA.
So they were extraordinarily low risk
according to the rating agencies, and the reason
that that mattered is because when you bought
those collateralized mortgage obligations,
they had a very low risk weighting,
and you didn't have to hold much capital associated with them.
Of course, it turned out that those mortgage-backed
securities were very high risk, and so the accurate accounting
for marketable securities is also very important in banks.
So here's just a summary of a bank balance sheet on the left.
Looking at the bottom, major liabilities,
again, are deposits.
We also sometimes have some debt and other borrowings.
So we know the accounting for debt and other borrowings,
that's basically bond accounting.
Deposit accounting is also basically bond accounting.
So we know how to do the accounting
for the liability side of the bank's balance sheet.
I want to spend just a minute or two reviewing the accounting
for marketable securities or passive investment securities.
Remember, there's three buckets they can go into.
There's trading, available for sale, and held to maturity.
And then after we've talked about marketable securities,
we're going to do the accounting for loans which,
as I've said several times, is very similar to the accounting
for accounts receivable.

So remember, when we were doing passive investments,
there's three choices you can make.
So if you buy a bond, you can call it a held to maturity
bond, and the advantage of that is
there's never any accounting associated with it.
So you just hold it to maturity, you get your cash back,
and there's no intermediate accounting.
If you call it available for sale security, remember,
the value of those bonds is going
to fluctuate on your balance sheet, which
means it's going to fluctuate in stockholders' equity.
But remember that it's going to fluctuate
through other comprehensive income,
so there's not going to be any kind of income statement
effect.
Finally, our final accounting that we talked about
was trading securities accounting
where it's going to fluctuate in value on your balance sheet.
It's going to have an income statement effect.
This is a funny article from CFOworld from 2011.
The crisis starts in October 2008.
And it used to be that once you chose something was going
to be available for sale, there were complicated rules
for getting it out of available for sale.
Or once you chose that something was fair value through profit
or loss, there are complicated rules
for getting it out of that.
But the IASB, which is the standard-setter for IFRS,
basically sort of came up with an accounting solution,
and the accounting solution was banks
could move all their financial assets out
of trading securities, out of available for sale, where
they're going to fluctuate on the balance sheet
and fluctuate in regulatory capital,
and sort of get rid of those things
to such an extent that the National Bank of Greece,
and I don't really understand this actually,
why a bank would have 90% of its assets or a lot of its assets
in Greek government bonds.
It seems crazy.
But it invests in all these Greek government bonds,
and it moved them into loans and matur--
held to maturity and loans and receivables
because this basically allowed them to not
do any accounting for them that would affect
their regulatory capital.