
JOHN CORE: So the allowance for loan losses
is very similar to what we've talked
about earlier in the course, which
is the allowance for doubtful accounts.
It comes about because of accrual accounting.
It is subjective.
It's a contra-asset account, and it
can have a large impact on a bank's financial statements.
So as a review, given the similarity,
if a borrower defaults on a loan in a particular period,
will it affect the bank's income?
And as you recall, no, it won't, so long
as the allowance at the start of the period was adequate.
Will it affect the bank's balance sheet?
In this case, yes, it will.
It's going to reduce loans outstanding.
And it's going to reduce the allowance for long losses.
So here's the balance sheet equation.
So we got our asset, which is loans.
We got the contra-asset, which is allowance for loan losses.
And we got retained earnings.
If we estimate a $500,000 potential loss,
what do we record?
So $500,000 in allowance for loan losses, which
is the contra-asset, and $500,000 in
retained earnings, which is provisioned for loan losses.
So this is exactly the same.
It's different words.
If we were talking about accounts receivable,
it would be the allowance for doubtful accounts
would be the contra-asset.
And instead of calling it provision for loan losses,
we would call it bad debt expense.
So the words are different, but the accounting
is almost identical.
So now what happens when we have to write off a loan?
So as we talked about above, we've
got sufficient allowance here.
We got a $500,000 in the allowance.
So when we have to write off this loan,
we're going to remove $20,000 from the asset, which is loans.
And then we're going to charge $20,000
to the contra-asset, which is allowance for loan losses.
But notice that this has no effect on our income
because we've provided for it adequately in the past.
So this is the same message from bad debt expense.
As long as you have a sufficient allowance for doubtful
accounts, when you have to write off a specific accounts
receivable, it's not going to affect your net income.
So this is review.

And also as a review, the way the banks come up
with their loan loss provision is basically aging analysis.
So this is a picture and some words from Wells Fargo's 2018
Annual Report, Note 6 of the financial statements.
And they say, "Many of our lost estimation techniques
used for the allowance for credit losses
rely on delinquency-based models."
And then the chart there in the middle of this slide
shows how they do that.
So they take different types of loans.
They take the real estate loans, credit cards, automobile,
et cetera.
And then they array them by Days Past Due.
So DPD in this chart is Days Passed Due.
So if it's 29 days past due or less, it's current.
So there's no credit reserve for that.
And then as you move out into greater and greater days past
due, by the time you get to 180 days past due,
there's really very little expectation
that you're going to collect very much, if anything
on that loan.
So this is basically an aging analysis
that we talked about earlier in the class.
Now what happens if there's a loan loss on capital?
So let's imagine the crisis starts,
we realize that we're under-reserved,
meaning that our allowance for loan losses is not big enough.
And we've got to double our allowance
from loan losses from 1% of assets to 2% of assets.
So this is just the same balance sheet
equation as we did before.
So if we add 1% of assets to loan losses,
that means we have to subtract 1% of assets
from stockholders' equity.
So that's going to lower our capital ratio before any tax
effects.
It's going to lower it by 1%.
And if we've got a 10% capital ratio,
this big provision here is going to knock that down by 10%
