JOHN CORE: All right, now what I want to do,
and this is going to be most of the remainder
of this discussion, is I'm going to talk
to you about a recent standard change that affects
the allowance for loan losses.
This is quite complicated.
I want to give you the intuition for this because it's
very controversial and it's really
affecting some banks their capital
because they have to reserve a lot more for loan losses.

So until just recently, so GAAP through 2019
was that we would provide for a loan loss if it were probable--
in red there-- probable that the loan was impaired.
And probable in this language means likely or greater
than 50%.

And this was called the incurred loss model.
So what it meant that if you were looking in a loan
and you thought there was only a 40% chance that it would
go bad, so that's still a pretty high probability
that it would go bad, but you would not reserve for that loan
until there was greater than a 50% chance of that loan
was going to go bad.
So essentially, this accounting was backward-looking.
So it wasn't until things got really bad with that loan
that there was greater than a 50% chance
that it was going to go bad.
And so in some sense, you were sitting
around waiting for bad news on your loans
to provide for the loan losses.
And perhaps because of this, with incurred loss accounting,
banks tend to be under-reserved at the start of bad times
and over-reserved at the start of good times.
So this is a picture from the Federal Reserve of St. Louis.
And what they're doing is just taking bank loans
and adding them all up, so the value of all bank loans.
And then they're taking the loan lost provision or the loan loss
allowance, adding that up, and then seeing how big it is.
So at the start of the financial crisis,
loan loss reserves as a percent of loans was about 1.2%.
So that's like late 2007 or early 2008.
Notice that in the crisis, which is
2008, 2009, and 2010, that loan loss reserve shoots up,
it triples.
So at the end of the crisis, loan loss reserves
are about 3 and 1/2% of total loans.
Then notice how as things get better that loan loss
reserve also drops over time.
And so what this means is that this is a pretend bank, Z Bank.
And Z Bank at the end of 2010, it
has a long loss reserve of $750 million, which is 3 and 1/2%
of its loans.
And at that time, it assumes that things are really, really
bad, as we can see from this picture here.

Now at some point, the economy recovers,
Z Bank doesn't need these really high reserves.
So let's imagine that happens in 2011.
And at the end of 2011, Z Bank estimates that it only
needs $300 in reserve.
So here's our allowance for loan losses,
beginning balance is 750.
We're going to solve for the provision for loan losses.
Write-offs are some amount.
And then our ending balance is 300.
Let's just also suppose that during 2011 we wrote off
$250 million worth of assets.
And then using Bayes, we can solve
for the provision for loan losses
during that period, which is a negative $200 million.

And then the lingo in the banking industry, this
is what's called a reserve release.
So ordinarily you're adding to reserves.
So your provision for loan loss is a positive number.
But because we've over-reserved in the past
at the start of good times, when the good times actually
happens, we're going to release these reserves.
And so a Wall Street Journal article
from 2012 about this, these reserve releases
occur when banks add to their loan loss reserves
less than the write offs of their uncollectible loans.
And the difference here gets funneled, as the writer says,
into net income.
Nothing wrong with this.
Again, we just had a lot of reserves
at the start of the year.
We decided we didn't need them.
So those excess reserves, the reserve release
are being pulled into net income.
But what's striking is for the big US banks,
particularly Bank of America and Citigroup, almost 50%
of their net income was coming from reserve releases.
So the bank wasn't actually performing well.
It's just that the bank had over-reserved in the past.