
PROFESSOR: So recently, starting in 2020,
and this has somewhat been delayed
because of the pandemic, it was all banks were supposed
to adopt this in 2020, but because of the pandemic,
they're allowed to sort of average it
in over the next four years.
So here's our incurred loss model,
as we talked about, where you only reserve if it's probable
that a loan is impaired.
Probable, again, means greater than 50%.
We're going to replace this.
This was a project that the US standard-setters
and the international standard-setters agreed on.
So they came up with this expected loss model,
and now you have to record a loss when
it's expected, even if there's, like,
a tiny chance of there being a loss, say, like, a 5% chance.
So this is obviously going to result in a much more
immediate loss accrual.
And this new standard is referred
to as CECL, which is Current Expected Credit Losses,
or CECL is the acronym.
And it's, as compared to the old standard, which
was kind of backward-looking, this
is forward-looking in the sense that when we make a loan,
we're going to look off in the future.
We're going to think, can we make a loss on this loan?
And if we can, we're going to reserve for it.
So the next several slides, I'm going to just show you
the differences in accounting at a big-picture level
between the old standard, which is the incurred loss standard,
and the new standard, which is CECL.
So we come back to our friends at Z Bank here,
and we're going to imagine that Z Bank issues 100 loans,
and each loan is for $1,000.
And the loans have an interest rate of 20%,
and they mature in one year.
So what I'm trying to do is give you
the flavor of credit card debt.
So if you have a credit card, if you ever
do not pay your credit card, the interest rate on that balance
is huge, right?
So it's not exactly 20% nowadays.
It's probably 15% nowadays, but it's a huge rate, though.
OK?
So based on its experience of making
these credit card-type loans, Z Bank
expects these payoff scenarios.
So it's going to make 100 loans.
Expects 95 of them are going to be good,
and the good loan will pay interest at 20%,
so it'll pay $1,000 times 20%, or $200 in interest,
and it will repay the loan amount, which is $1,000.
The bad ones, on the other hand, they're
going to assume they pay no interest,
and they're going to pay none of the loan back.
And so another way of saying this is that at the time
it makes these loans, based on its past history
with these kind of customers, Z Bank
expects credit losses on 5% of the loans.
They expect 5% of them to be bad.
But it doesn't know which of those 100 customers
are going to be bad.
It just knows that there's going to be 5 bad loans out of 100,
on average.
So the old accounting, which is incurred loss accounting,
we make 100 loans for $1,000.
So we put out $100,000 worth of cash,
and the asset goes on our balance
sheet, $100,000 worth of loans.
Do we accrue a loss provision on January 1?
No.
At this point, we don't have any data
that a specific individual loan is going to go bad.
So there's no loan loss provision here.

At June 30, say, like, by this point, five of these loans
have had no payments made on them,
so they're unlikely to pay.
So we're going to create a reserve.
We're going to create an allowance for loan losses,
and we're going to create a $5,000 provision
for loan losses that will reduce our income.
Now, on June 30, we're going to record interest,
and we're just going to assume that we're getting interest
on the 95 loans that are still current at that point.
And six months of interest at 10%, so 95 times 10%
would be $9,500 of interest revenue.

And then at the end of the year, 95 of the loans
pay off in full.
Five of them don't pay us anything,
and we charge those off, and then
we get our other six months of interest.
So we got loans paid off in full we get $95,000 from.
We write off the $5,000 worth of bad loans, the five bad loans.
And then we get our other six months of interest.
So that's current incurred loss accounting.
Now, let's look at the same thing with CECL.
So the accounting at the start is the same.
Cash goes down $100,000.
Loans go up $100,000.
Do we accrue a loan loss provision on January 1?
Well, based on our experience, we know that 5% of these loans
are going to go bad.
So at the time we make the loan, we're
going to have a $5,000 provision for loan losses
and create an allowance for loan losses there.
Now, on June 30, we identify five loans
that are unlikely to pay.
Here, we're not going to do anything because we already
made this accrual.

You're going to record interest.
So there's 95 good loans at 20%, times a half a year is $9,500.
And then again, 95 of the loans pay in full.

Five don't pay and charge off.
And then we record the remaining amounts of interest.
So notice the only difference in this accounting
here is that the loan loss provision happens immediately
rather than we waited at six months
in this stylized example.
One other thing I want to point out to you
here is notice that we're getting
$19,000 worth of interest.
We're getting back $95,000 worth of principle.
So total cash repayments are $114,000.
We put out $100,000 worth of cash.
So we're making 14%.
Even though there's a lot of bad debt here or bad loans here,
this is a very smart thing for banks
to do so that they make tremendous amounts of money
on these credit card-type loans.
This is why the banks hate CECL, which is
in the header of my next slide.
So even though we're going to make a lot of money
on these loans, when we issue these loans at the beginning,
we have an immediate loss, OK?
And that's that accrues loss provision,
so our income is negative on the day that we issue these loans.
It won't be until the loans sort of mature
and pay off that we'll sort of catch up
on this negative accrual.
So the banks really, really, really hate this provision.
It's kind of funny accounting, and when you think about it,
it comes from the matching principle in the sense
that we're accruing for loan losses immediately,
but we don't get to accrue for the high interest income
until we earn that interest income.
So there's sort of a failure of matching going on here.
But this is the new standard, and I
want you to at least have the outlines of it
because it's something that's going to be talked about
and really affect the banking industry going forward.

Here's JP Morgan's investor presentation
on this, back in 2019.
So JP Morgan is sort of looking forward to the effect there,
but JP Morgan is computing a 35% increase in their loan loss
allowances, so loan loss allowance
is a big contra asset that's going to increase by 35%.
That's going to reduce JP Morgan's income and JP Morgan's
capital so that this is a big deal.
And who gets hurt most by this are
people like JP Morgan that have big credit card
portfolios where there's a lot of loss experience.
So consumer loans, as this chart sort of talked about,
have high loss experience, but home loans
and other types of loans won't have so much high loss
experience.
So takeaways, remember, we talked
about loan loss provisions.
This is exactly like bad debt expenses,
so this would review--
this involves judgment and mixed incentives.
We also reviewed marketable securities accounting.
These are the only two things that
are going to be on the exam, is sort of the items
that we reviewed.
The rest of this, we talked about deposits.
We talked about how deposits created a demand for banks
to highly leverage themselves.
We talked about how regulators are there
to prevent banks from taking on too much leverage.
And what we talked about here is very
relevant to the crisis of 2008.
There have been lots of fixes that have been put in here,
but I imagine that if the banking industry runs
into difficulty because of the current pandemic,
these same issues are going to come back.
Are loan loss provisions adequate enough?
Are marketable securities being accounted for properly?