PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
show an example of how insurance companies protect themselves
against changes in interest rates.
This example is similar to how pension funds, endowment funds,
and other financial institutions manage their liabilities as
well.
Consider a life insurance company,
which has existing liabilities that
obligate it to pay out $5 million per year
for the next 10 years.
Assume that the term structure of interest rates is flat
and the current interest rate is 2%.
The insurance company would like to invest in safe government
bonds in such a way that makes it immune to fluctuations
in interest rates.
It considers 1-year and 10-year treasury STRIPS.
Construct an investment portfolio
for the insurance company that hedges the interest rate risk.
Let's first find the current value of liabilities.
Liabilities of this insurance company
represent a 10 year annuity.
We can use the present value of annuity formula
to find its value.
It equals to $44.91 million.
Next, let's find the duration of liabilities.
Using the tools we learned in the first part of this course,
we find that the duration of liabilities is 5.34 years.
To hedge liabilities, we want to allocate
funds across 1-year and 10-year STRIPS in such a way
that duration of the portfolio matches
the duration of liabilities.
Let's introduce some notation.
Let's note by the V1, the value invested in 1-year STRIPS
and by V10, the value invested in 10-year STRIPS.
The hedging portfolio should have the following two
properties.
First, its value should equal to the current value
of liabilities.
And second, the duration of the portfolio
should be the same as the duration of liabilities.
This gives us the following two equations,
V1 plus V10 equals to VL.
And the duration of asset portfolio,
which is the weighted average of durations
of 1-year and 10-year STRIPS should equal
to the duration of liabilities.
Plugging in the numbers for the value of liabilities,
the duration of 1-year and 10 year STRIPS
and the duration of liabilities, we
get the system of two equations with two unknowns.
Solving these two equations, we find
that V1 equals to $23.27 million and V10
equals the $21.64 million.
Therefore, to immunize itself against changes
in interest rates, the insurance company
should purchase $23.27 million worth of 1-year STRIPS
and $21.64 million worth of 10-year STRIPS.
Note that since we're matching only duration,
this hedge immunizes the insurance company
only against small parallel shifts in the yield curve.
Therefore, this hedge is not perfect.