
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will illustrate
how, in a perfect capital market,
payout policy affects share price.
We will consider two major types of payouts--
dividends and share repurchases.
Consider a firm whose board of directors
just announced a cash dividend of $100 million
to be paid tomorrow.
For valuation purposes, ignore this one-day period.
After this payout the firm will have assets
worth $1,000 million and 10 million shares outstanding.
The firm's cost of capital is 10%.
Ignore corporate and personal taxes.
Also, assume that the firm has no debt.
What is the firm's share price before the dividend is paid?
What is the firm's share price after the dividend payment?
In other words, what is the ex-dividend price?
Suppose that, instead of paying out
all cash as a single dividend at once,
the board announces that it will pay quarterly dividends
with a first dividend of $25 million
to be paid the day after the announcement.
What is the firm's share price after the first dividend
payment in this case?
Assume that unpaid earnings are reinvested back
into the firm's operations.
Currently, the firm has $100 million in cash,
and its assets are worth $1,000 million, or $1 billion.
Since it has no debt and 10 million shares outstanding,
the current share price must be $110.
Next, let's compute the ex-dividend share price.
First, note that per share amount of dividend
is $100 million divided by 10 million shares outstanding,
which gives us $10 per share.
After the payout, the current share price
is reduced by the amount of per share dividend.
Therefore, the ex-dividend share price will be $100.
What will be the share price if, instead
of paying all cash in one dividend payment,
the firm pays out only a quarter of it, in other words,
$25 million out of $100 million?
In this case, the per share dividend amount would be $2.50.
If the remaining cash of $75 million
is reinvested back into the firm's operations
and paid out later, the present value of this cash
would not change.
In other words, it would still be worth $75 million.
The reason for this is that this cash
will earn 10% return, which is the rate of return
on the firm's assets.
To find its present value, we would
have to discount the future value back
at a 10% discount rate, which would give us $75 million.
If, on the other hand, this cash will remain uninvested and paid
out later, the present value of this cash
would be lower due to the time value of money.
This implies that the ex-dividend share price in this
case would be $107.50.
Suppose that the day after the quarterly dividend
payment, the firm announces it will buy back $21.5 million
worth of shares to be implemented the following day.
How many shares will it buy back?
What will be the share price after the repurchase?
To find the number of shares that the firm will buy back,
we take the total dollar amount of buyback and divide it
by the share price, which is $107.50.
This gives us 200,000 shares.
To find the share price, let's first
find the value of the firm and the number of shares
after the buyback.
The original firm value was $1.1 billion,
and we paid out $25 million in dividends
and repurchased $21.5 million worth of shares.
This implies that the current firm value is $1,053.5 million.
The original number of shares outstanding was 10 million,
and we repurchased 200,000.
This means that the current number of shares outstanding
is 9.8 million.
To find the share price, we divide
the firm value by the number of shares outstanding.
Recall that this firm has no debt.
And, hence, the value of equity equals
to the value of the firm.
We see that the share price after the repurchase equals
to $107.50.
We see that there is no change in the share price,
precisely because the value of cash outflow from the firm
due to buyback is equal to the cash
inflow in the form of surrendered shares.
Mechanically, claims to future dividends for the existing
shareholders have risen in the amount that
exactly compensates for the cash released to repurchase shares.