
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider an example of corporate risk hedging
with derivative securities.
Consider a market with two possible states a year
from now--
good or bad.
In the good state, the return on the market portfolio
will be 10%.
And in the bad state, it will be negative 20%.
The one-year risk-free rate is 5%.
A biotechnology startup in Cambridge, Massachusetts
works on a new vaccine delivery technology.
Next year, this technology will be sold to Moderna.
If the market is in the good state,
the startup will generate $80 million in cash flow
on this sale.
If the market, however, is in the bad state,
the cash flow will only be $20 million.
The startup is considering borrowing $15 million
to fund the development.
If the startup fails to pay the loan back,
it faces bankruptcy costs of $5 million.
In the event of default, these costs
will reduce the value of the remaining assets
and therefore, the payout to debt holders.
Suppose that the loan is issued at par
and that the interest is due at maturity.
You are hired as a financial advisor to the startup.
Your goal is to advise on the best financing arrangement.
Assume that the tax rate is 25%.
First, let's find the value of this firm
if it is 100% equity financed.
The after-tax cash flow in year 1 in the good state
is $60 million.
And in the bad state it is $15 million.
To find the present value after-tax cash flows,
let's first find risk-neutral probabilities.
The risk-neutral probability of the good state is 83.3%,
and risk-neutral probability of the bad state is 16.7%.
Knowing the risk-neutral probabilities,
we can find the value of this firm
if it is 100% equity financed.
This value is $50 million.

Now let's find the value of this firm if it borrows $15 million.
First, let's find the promised yield on this loan.
We can write down the following equation.
The borrowed amount, which is $15 million,
has to equal to the expected value of the payoff
from this loan under the risk-neutral measure discounted
to present at the risk-free rate.
This equals to the risk-neutral probability
of the good state, which is 83.3% times the total payoff
from the loan in the good state, which
equals to the principal of $15 million
plus interest, which equals to the promised yield,
plus the risk-neutral probability of the bad state,
which is 16.7%, times the payoff from the bond in the bad state,
which equals the total value of assets in the bad state, $15
million, minus the losses of $5 million
that the firm would incur in the event of default.
Solving this equation, we get 12.67%.
If this loan is issued at par, the interest rate on this loan
would be 12.67%.
And its face value would be $15 million.
Knowing the interest rate on this loan,
we can find the present value of interest tax shields.
They equal to the expected value of tax shields generated
by this loan under the risk neutral measure discounted
to present at the risk-free rate.
Importantly, note that this loan generates tax shields only
in the up state, because in the down state,
the firm defaults and does not pay interest,
and therefore, does not get the tax shield.
Hence, the present value of tax shields
equals to the risk-neutral probability
of the up state times the tax rate
times the interest rate times the face
value of this loan divided by 1 plus the risk-free rate.
This gives us $0.38 million.
Next, let's find the present value
of financial distress costs.
They equal to the expected value of financial distress costs
under the risk-neutral measure discounted to present
at the risk-free rate.
Since the firm defaults on the loan only in the down state,
the present value of distress costs
is the risk-neutral probability of the down state
times the dollar value of distress costs, which
is $5 million.
This gives us $0.79 million.
Putting this all together we can find
the value of the levered firm.
It equals to the value of the unlevered firm
plus the present value of tax shields,
minus the present value of distress costs.
We find that the value of the firm if it takes the loan
is $49.58 million.
We see that this value is lower than the value
of the unlevered firm, which was $50 million.
The reason for this is that the present value of distress costs
outweighs the present value of interest tax shields.
Based on this analysis, we conclude that the firm
should not take the loan.

CFO of the startup considers the possibility
of hedging default risk in order to avoid bankruptcy costs.
She approached the investment bank
Lazard, which offered to sell a put option that
pays $750,000 in the bad state of the economy
and nothing in the good state.
Assuming that the option will be fairly priced,
what would you advise the biotech startup to do?
Having additional $750,000 in the bad state effectively
allows the startup to avoid default
and to borrow $15 million at the risk-free rate.
With this hedge, the startup has enough funds
to pay both the principal, which is $15 million,
and the interest, 5% times $15 million,
which is $750,000 in both good and bad states.
So let's quantify the costs and benefits of this hedging
strategy.
The cost of this hedging strategy
is the price of the put option, which we have to pay to Lazard.
Assuming that this option would be fairly priced,
its price equals to the present value of the payoff
under the risk control measure discounted to present
at the risk-free rate.
This gives us $0.12 million.
The benefit of this hedging strategy
is the fact that we avoid bankruptcy costs
and generate interest tax shield in both states of the world.
The tax shield equals to the tax rate times the risk-free rate,
because with the hedge, as long as it is risk-free,
ties the principal amount.
This tax shield is risk-free and hence, we
discount it to present at the risk-free rate.
We find that the present value of tax shield is $0.18 million.
We see that the benefits outweigh the costs.
And therefore, the startup should take the loan
and buy the put.
By doing this, the startup avoids default,
and its value becomes $50 million
plus the present value of tax shields, which is $0.18 million
minus the cost of hedging, which is $0.12 million.
The firm value is therefore $50.06 million.
