
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
show an example of how an endowment
fund can hedge an interest rate risk of its fixed income
portfolio.
Consider an endowment fund which owns a fixed income
portfolio consisting of two US Treasury STRIPS.
It has 1 million units of STRIP A and 1.5 million units
of STRIP B. The fund would like to construct
a hedge for the interest rate risk using Treasury STRIP C.
The following table shows the duration of the three bonds.
Bond A has a duration of four years.
Bond B has a duration of eight years.
And bond C has a duration of seven years.
We will denote prices of the three bonds by PA, PB, and PC,
respectively.
All STRIPS have a principal of $100.
We will assume that the term structure of interest rates
is flat and that the current interest rate is 2%.
We will answer the following questions:
what is the modified duration of the portfolio?
Using bond C, construct a hedge to protect
the value of the portfolio against parallel shifts
in interest rates.
How many units of bond C should we go long or short?
Is the hedge constructed in part B a perfect hedge?
Let's start by computing the modified
duration of the endowment fund's portfolio.
Recall that the duration of a portfolio
is a weighted average of durations
of assets in the portfolio.
Therefore, to find the duration of the portfolio,
we first need to find the total value invested in bonds A
and B, and then, take the weighted average of durations
of bonds A and B.
We are given the face value of each bond
and we know that interest rates at all maturities are 2%.
This allows us to compute prices of bonds A and B.
We see that the price of bond A is $92.38
and the price of bond B is $85.35.
The value of the portfolio equals
to the number of units of each bond, times their prices.
We find that the value of the endowment fund's portfolio
is $220.41 million.
Now we can compute the duration of the portfolio.
Recall the duration of bond A is four years
and duration of bond B is eight years.
The duration of the portfolio equals
to the total value invested in bond A, which
is 1 million units times the bond price
92.38, divided by the total value of the portfolio,
multiplied by the duration, which is 4.
Plus the total value invested in bond B,
which is 1.5 million units times the bond price
85.35, divided by the total value of the portfolio,
multiplied by the duration, which is 8.
We find that the duration of the portfolio is 6.32 years.
To compute modified duration of the portfolio,
recall that the modified duration equals to the Macaulay
duration, which we just computed,
divided by 1 plus yield.
Recommend you to review week four of the first part
of the course.
In our case, modified duration equals
to 6.32 divided by 1 plus 2%, which equals to 6.2 years.

Next, let's construct the hedge.
Let's denote our position in bond C by nc.
If this number is positive, we go long.
If this number is negative, we go short.
To hedge against parallel and small shifts in interest rates,
we need to establish a position in bond C
so that the duration of our portfolio is 0.
Let's denote by H the new portfolio,
which in addition to bonds A and B, will have bond C in it.
Let's add the duration of portfolio H to 0.
Solving this equation for nc, we get negative Dp, which
is the duration of portfolio P times VP, which
is the value of portfolio P divided
by PC, which is the price of bond
C times DC, which is the duration of bond C.
Recall that the duration of portfolio P is 6.32.
The value of portfolio P is $220.41 million.
The price of bond C is $87.06 and its duration
is seven years.
This gives us negative 2.29 million units.
Therefore, in order to construct a hedge portfolio
with zero duration, we need to short 2.29 million units
of bond C.
Is this a perfect hedge?
Duration matching allows us to hedge
only small and parallel shifts in the yield curve.
Due to convexity of bond prices, large changes in interest rates
will not be perfectly hedged with just duration matching.
We would also need to match convexity.
Also, in practice, interest rates at different maturities
may be affected differently by economic events.
This would affect prices of bonds of different maturities
differently, which would affect the quality of our hedge.
Therefore, this is not a perfect hedge.
