
PROFESSOR: Kinross Gold is considering
to acquire a gold mine in Russia.
Estimated reserves of this mine are 1 million ounces.
It takes one year to extract gold,
and estimated extraction costs are $1,000 per ounce.
The current price of gold is $1,200 per ounce.
It will either increase to $1,600 per ounce
or decrease to $900 per ounce next year,
and after that it will stay at that level forever.
The risk free rate is 2%, and the gold price risk
is not diversifiable.
We will answer two questions.
First, what is the value of this mine
if extraction starts today?
And second, if Kinross Gold can wait for a year
to start the extraction process, and they can also
abandon this mine, what is its current value?
Let's start this question by discussing
what does the statement of "the gold price risk
is not diversifiable" actually I mean?
If it was fully diversifiable, or as we say,
idiosyncratic, then we could have discounted cash flows
at the risk-free rate.
Since it is not diversifiable, we cannot discount them
at the risk-free rate.
But we are not given a discount rate in this question.
So what should we do?
We will use prices of traded assets to find state prices,
and we will use the state prices to value the mine.
This is analogous to how we valued options, where
we used prices of the risk-free bond and the stock
to obtain state prices and used the state
prices to price the option.
Let's start by drawing a tree that
captures the evolution of future gold prices.
The current price is $1,200, and it will either go up to $1,600
or go down to $900.
We will use the same notation we adopted
when we studied options.
How will they know the current price by s,
and we'll use multipliers u and d for the up and down moves
respectively.
Based on given prices of gold, we can compute u and d.
U equals to 1,600 divided by 1,200, which is 1.33,
and d equals to 900 divided by 1,200, which is 0.75.
Let's compute the risk neutral probabilities
of the up and down moves.
qu, which is the risk neutral probability of the up move,
equals 1 plus the risk free rate minus d divided by u minus d.
Recall that the risk free rate is
2%, which gives us qu of 0.463.
qd equals to u minus 1 plus rf, divided by u minus d,
and this gives us 0.537.
qd can also be simply computed as 1 minus qu,
because the risk neutral probabilities have
to add up to 1.
Now we can compute state prices.
Phi u, which is the price of the up state,
is qu divided by 1 plus rf, which equals 0.454.
Similarly, phi d, which is the price of the down state,
is qd divided by 1 plus rf, which equals to 0.527.
Equipped with state prices, we can
find the present value of revenue
if we start extraction today.
Recall that it takes us one year to finish the extraction
and sell the gold.
The present value of next year's revenue is 1,600 times
phi u plus 900 times phi d.
This equals 1,200.
Therefore, the current expected revenue per ounce of gold
is $1,200.
This, of course, should not surprise us.
The expected revenue per ounce of gold
should, of course, equal the current market
price of gold, which we were given in the beginning.
In fact, our state prices were computed based
on the current price of gold.
We could have in principle answered this question
without computing the state prices.
We have done this here for illustrative purposes.
Plus we will utilize state process
in the second part of this question.
Given that extraction costs are $1,000 per ounce,
our cash flow is $200 per ounce of gold.
Since the mine contains one million ounces of gold,
the value of this mine if we start extraction now
is $200 million.
Now let's figure out what will be the value of this mine
if we could delay gold extraction for a year
and abandon this mine if it is profitable to do so.
Note that we will do the extraction only
in the up state, where gold prices exceed the extraction
costs.
In the down state, we will simply abandon the mine.
This means that in year one, in the down state,
the value of this mine is 0.
In the up state, its value can be computed as follows.
We pay $1,000 per ounce in year one to receive $1,600 per ounce
with certainty in year 2.
Therefore, the value per ounce in year one in the up state
is negative $1,000 plus $1,600 divided by 1
plus the risk free rate, which is 2%,
and this equals to $568.63.
Given the above, the current value
of this mine per ounce of gold is 568.63 times phi u plus 0
times phi d.
This gives us $258.03.
Given that we can extract one million ounces,
the total value of the mine is $258.03 million.
The flexibility to wait and abandon
is clearly very valuable and increases the value
of this mine by $58.03 million.