
In this video, we will consider an example
that demonstrates how discount rates may
differ over different horizons.
We will consider an asset, whose payoff is linked
to the price of crude oil.
Suppose the current price of crude oil is $55 per barrel.
Consider an asset that in year 5 pays the realized
price of oil in year 1.
What is the current value of this asset?
Let's start by thinking, what should be the value
of this asset in year 1?
Between now and the end of year 1, the price of oil
is uncertain.
But starting in year 2 and until the end of year 5,
the price of oil at the end of year 1 is known.
Therefore, between year 1 and year 5,
this asset is risk free.
And hence, its value in year 1 is
p_1 divided by 1 plus r_f raised to the power 4.
Here by p_1, we're denoting the price of oil in year 1,
and by r_f, we're denoting the risk-free rate.
Now between year 0 and year 1, we
don't know what the price of oil will be.
Let's assume that the expected return on oil is r_o.
For both the risk-free rate and the expected return on oil,
we will assume that these returns
are the same at all horizons.
In other words, the term structure
of these rates of return is flat.
The value of this asset in year 0
equals its expected value in year 1, discounted
to present at rates r_o to reflect
the riskiness of disaster between year 0 and year 1.
Plugging in the value of this asset in year 1
into this equation, we get expected value
of p_1 divided by 1 plus r_f raised to the power of 4,
divided by 1 plus r_o.
Since there is no uncertainty in the risk-free rate r_f,
we get the expected value of p_1 divided
by 1 plus r_o multiplied by 1 plus r_f
raised to the power of 4.
You can see that we're discounting
the cash flows that we get from this asset at different rates
during this five-year time period.
This is simply due to the fact that its riskiness changes
during this time period.
The final step is to figure out what is the expected
price of oil in year 1.
It simply is the current price multiplied by the expected rate
of return on oil.
We see that 1 plus r_o in the numerator and denominator
of this equation cancels out.
And we are simply left with the current price
of oil divided by 1 plus r_f raised to the power of 4.
If we assume that the risk-free rate is 2%,
then the current value of this asset is $50.81.
Next, let's find the value of an asset that, in year 5,
pays the realized price of oil in year 2.
We can repeat the steps that we did
to find the value of the previous asset.
First, notice that there is no uncertainty
in what the payoff of this asset will
be between the year 2 and the year 5.
Therefore, we can find the value of this asset in year 2,
by discounting the cash flow that we
get from this asset in year 5 at the risk-free rate.
We see that the value of this asset in year
equals p_2 divided by 1 plus r_f raised to the power of 3.
Between year 0 and year 2, we don't know
what the price of oil will be.
The value of this asset in year 0
equals its expected value in year 2, discounted to present,
at the rate r_o, to reflect the riskiness of this asset
between year 0 and year 2.
Plugging in the value of this asset in year 2
into this equation, we get expected value
of p_2 divided by 1 plus r_f raised
to the power of 3, divided by 1 plus r_o raised
to the power of 2, which gives us expected value of p_2
divided by 1 plus r_o squared multiplied by 1
plus r_f raised to the power of 3.
Similar to the first asset, notice
that we are discounting the cash flows
that we get from this asset at different rates
during this five-year time period.
This is because the riskiness of this asset
changes as we go from year 2 to year 3
because we no longer bear uncertainty in oil prices.
The expected price of oil in year 2
is the current price multiplied by the expected rate of return
over the next two years.
We see that 1 plus r_o squared in the numerator
and denominator cancels out, and we
are left with p_0, which is the current price of oil,
divided by 1 plus the risk-free rate raised to the power of 3.
Recall that the risk-free rate is 2%.
Hence the current value of this asset is $51.83.
Notice that the value of this asset, which in year 5
pays the price of oil in year 2, is
higher than the value of the previous asset, which in year 5
paid the price of oil in year 1.
This is because this asset is riskier
as we're exposed to the oil price risk for one
additional year.
Let's consider one more asset, that in year 5
pays p_1 plus p_2 plus p_5 divided by 3,
where p_1, p_2 and p_5 are the realized prices of oil in years
1, 2, and 5 respectively.
What is the current value of this asset?
The current value of this asset is simply
1/3 of the value of the asset that pays p_1 in the year 5
plus 1/3 of the value of the asset that pays p_2 in year 5,
plus 1/3 of the value of the asset that pays p_5 in year 5.
We have already found the values of assets
that pay p_1 and p_2 in year 5.
So what's left is to find the value of the asset that
pays p_5 in year 5.
In this case, we varied the oil price risk all the way
to the end of year 5.
Therefore, the current value of the asset
is the expected price of oil in year 5 divided by 1 plus
r_o raised to the power of 5.
Since the expected oil price in year 5
is the current oil price multiplied by 1 plus r_o raised
to the power of 5, the current value of this asset
is simply the current oil price.
It's quite simple to understand why.
The market currently values oil at $55 a barrel.
The asset that in year 5 pays the price of oil in year 5
has to have the same value as the oil itself,
as it has identical risk.
Now we can combine all the results
to find the current value of the asset that in year five
pays p_1 plus p_2 plus p_5 divided by 3.
It's value equals 1/3 of the current oil price divided
by a 1 plus the risk-free rate raised to the power of 4,
plus 1/3 of the current oil price divided by 1
plus risk-free rate raised to the power of 3,
plus 1/3 of the current oil price.
Recall that the risk-free rate is 2%,
and the current oil price is $55.
This gives us the current value of this asset of $52.55.
