
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to value a growth option, which
is an important class of real options.
Consider a firm, which operates a restaurant.
The restaurant is expected to generate after-tax cash
flow of $1 million next year.
This cash flow is expected to grow at a 2% annual rate
in perpetuity.
Next year, the firm will have an opportunity
to open a new restaurant.
If this new restaurant is opened,
it will start generating exactly the same cash
flow as the first restaurant in year two.
To be precise, the first restaurant
will generate $1.02 million in year two.
And the second restaurant, if built,
will generate $1.02 million as well.
These cash flows will continue to grow
at 2% rate in perpetuity.
There is an uncertainty with respect
to the investment costs needed to open
the new restaurant next year.
Depending on the state of the economy and availability
of retail space, these costs can be either $5 million
with 20% probability, or $15 million with 80% probability.
Let's assume that the appropriate discount
rate for the restaurant business is 12%.
What is the present value of this growth opportunity?
Let's start by determining the optimal decision in year one.
Should we open the second restaurant or not?
What would be the value of the firm
if opening costs are $5 million and we decide
to open the new restaurant?
The value of the firm in the year one
will be determined by the costs that we need to incur in order
to open the second restaurant, and the value of the cash flow
stream from year two onwards.
The cash flows will be $1.02 million
from each of the two restaurants.
Given the discount rate of 4% and the perpetual growth of 2%,
we find that the firm value in year one will be $15.4 million.
Now, what will be the value of the firm
if opening costs are $5 million, and we decide
not to open the new restaurant?
In this case, we will have only one restaurant that in year two
will bring in the cash flow of $1.02 million.
The value of the firm in this case will be $10.2 million.
Let's summarize these findings.
If the opening costs are $5 million,
and if we open the new restaurant,
the firm value will be $15.4 million.
If we decide not to open the new restaurant,
the firm value will be $10.2 million.
It is clear that the optimal decision
is to open the new restaurant.
Let's repeat these steps and determine
what is the optimal decision if the opening
costs are $15 million.
If we open the new restaurant we're spending $15 million
in the year one, and generating $1.02 million times
2 from year two onwards.
The firm value in this case is $5.4 million.
If we don't open the new restaurant,
we generate cash flows from only one restaurant and the firm
value in this case remains $10.2 million.
Let's summarize.
If the opening costs are $15 million
and if we open the new restaurant,
the firm value will be $5.4 million.
If we decide not to open the new restaurant,
the firm value will be $10.2 million.
It is clear that the optimal decision in this case
is not to open the new restaurant.
Knowing the optimal business decision in year one,
we can compute the current value of the firm.
The current firm value is the sum
of the cash flow in year one, discounted to present,
plus the continuation of value of the firm in the year one
discounted to present as well.
Recall that the cash flow in year one is $1 million.
Also recall that with probability of 20%,
the opening costs will be $5 million.
In which case, we open the new restaurant
and realize the firm value of $15.4 million.
And with the remaining probability of 80%,
the opening costs will be $50 million.
In which case, we don't open the new restaurant.
The firm value in this case will be only 10.2 million.
This gives us the current firm value of $10.93 million.
Finally, let's determine the value of the growth
option for this firm.
We can compute the value of the growth option as the difference
between the firm value with the growth option,
minus the firm value without the growth option.
We have just computed the value of the firm
with the growth option.
So what remains to be done is to compute the current firm value
without the growth option.
The value of the firm without the growth option
is simply the value of growing perpetuity
that pays $1 million, starting next year, and grows at 2%.
The firm value in this case is $10 million.
Combining the results, we find that the value
of the growth opportunity for this firm is $930,000.
We can see that this value is fairly low compared
to the value of the firm without the growth opportunity.
The reason for this is that the likelihood
of being able to develop the new restaurant next year
at a low cost of $5 million is only 20%.
