
INSTRUCTOR: In this video, we will
find the value of the abandonment
option of the gold mine that Kinross Gold is
considering to acquire.
The value of the first abandonment option,
which abbreviate as AO, can be found as the value of the mine
with the option minus the value of the mine without the option.
Note that in the previous video, we only
found the value of the mine if we start production now
and the value of the mine if we delay production for one year
and can abandon it.
The difference in the value of the two
is not necessarily the value of the abandonment option.
The reason for this is that we're
conflating two options, the option to delay
and the option to abandon.
To separate the two, we need to compute
the value of the mine with the option to delay
but not the option to abandon.
To do this, let's compute the value of the mine if we delay
production by one year but cannot abandon the mine.
We have already computed the value
of the mine in the up state.
It was $258.03 per ounce of gold.
Similarly, we can compute the value
of the mine in the down state.
It is negative $1,000 plus $900 divided by 1
plus the risk-free rate, which equals to negative $117.65
per ounce of gold.
To compute the current value of the mine per ounce of gold,
we multiply its value in the up state
by the price of the up state and add its value
in the down state multiplied by the price of the down state.
This gives us the current value of mine
per ounce of gold of $196.08.
This result implies that the value
of the mine if we start production today
is greater than the value of the mine
if we delay production for one year.
This means that the option to delay in this case
is worthless.
Overall, this implies that the current value
of the mine without the option to abandon is $200 million.
Putting this all together, we have the following.
The value of the mine with the option to abandon
is $258.03 million.
And the value of the mine without the option to abandon
is $200 million.
This means that the value of the abandonment option
is $58.03 million.
