
INSTRUCTOR: There is a private firm called XYZ.
This firm manufactures shoes.
This company wants to go public, or do an IPO,
and it's hired an investment bank as its advisor.
The bank will assess the fair market value of this firm.
And one of the key ingredients that
is needed to assess the fair market value
is the assessment of the business risk of this firm.
One way of doing this for an investment bank
is to look at the current public firms
and to see whether there are any shoe manufacturers which
we can use to assess the business risk of shoe
manufacturing business.
After further investigation, investment bank
could not find any "pure plays," or the companies
that just manufacture shoes.
However, they were able to find two companies that manufacture
both shoes and apparel.
These are the two firms, A and B.
And based on the assessment of the investment bank,
these are the percentages of the market
value of the current firm A and B
that comes from shoe and apparel business correspondingly.
For example, for firm A, the current market value
of this firm is derived 40% from the shoe manufacturing
business and 60% from the apparel business.
For firm B, this percentage is 70% and 30%.
The investment bank assessed the business
risk of these two firms.
And for firm A, firm beta is 0.9.
And for firm B, the firm beta is 0.7.
We will assume that both of these firms
are full equity financed.
So both of them don't have debt, so only
equity in their capital structure.
Now, based on this information, we
would like to assess the business risk of shoe
manufacturing so that we can assess the business
risk of our private firm XYZ.
Let's solve this question.
I will start by denoting by beta s, the beta of pure shoe
manufacturing business.
Similarly, by beta a, I will denote the beta of pure apparel
business.
Now let's go back to firm A and think
of this firm as a portfolio of these two pure shoe
manufacturing and pure apparel business.
Since we know the market weights of both
of these businesses in the business of firm A,
we can write down the following equation.
So 40% of beta s plus 60% of beta a
would be equal to the current observed beta of this firm A.
So again, we can write down this equation.
Because the portfolio beta, or the portfolio
of the firm that consists of these two businesses,
would equal to the weighted average
of betas of these individual lines of businesses.
Similarly, we can write down the same equation for firm B.
70% times beta s, because this firm consists 70% of shoe
manufacturing business and 30% of apparel business-- so 70%,
times beta s--
plus 30% times beta a would equal to 0.7.
Now, the goal is to find beta s and beta a.
These are two unknowns.
Now we have two equations and two unknowns.
And we can solve the system of equations for beta s and beta
a.
The solution is this.
So beta s equals to 0.5 and beta a equals to 1.17.
This means that a pure shoe manufacturing business will
have a beta of 0.5 and a purely apparel business
will have a beta of 1.17.
In our case, since we're trying to assess
the risk of purely shoe manufacturing
business for our private firm XYZ, the beta of this firm
should be 0.5.
