
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to determine the cost of capital
for a firm or a project in situations
when asset returns are characterized by factor models.
A private equity fund is considering
to buy a gold mining company, Kinross Gold.
The firm is expected to generate after-tax cash
flow of $540 million next year.
This cash flow is expected to grow at 2.5% in perpetuity.
The private equity fund needs to determine the cost of capital
for Kinross Gold in order to estimate its value.
Suppose that asset returns are characterized
by a two-factor model where the first risk factor is the market
risk and the second risk factor is the price of gold.
You have estimated factor loadings for Kinross Gold
and found that its loading on the market risk is 0.3
and its loading on the gold price risk is 1.92.
In order to estimate Kinross Gold's cost of capital,
you have obtained the following information on three
well diversified portfolios, A, B, and C. This table
gives you expected returns and factor loadings on the market
risk and the gold price risk for each of the three portfolios.
What price the private equity fund
should be willing to pay in order to buy Kinross Gold?
We will assume that Kinross Gold does not
have debt on its balance sheet.
In other words, it is an all-equity financed firm.
We can find the value of Kinross Gold using the Gordon growth
model.
Recall that the question gives us the after-tax cash flow
that Kinross Gold is expected to generate in year one.
After that, this cash flow will grow in perpetuity
at a constant rate.
Therefore, the value of the firm is the cash flow
in year one divided by r minus g, where
r is the cost of capital and g is
the perpetual constant growth rate.
We know that the cash flow in year one
is expected to be $540 million and the perpetual growth
rate is 2.5%.
Therefore, the only unknown in this equation
is the cost of capital.
And therefore, to find the value of this firm,
we need to find its cost of capital.
To find the cost of capital, we will utilize the arbitrage
pricing theory.
Recall the APT pricing equation from the first part
of this course.
This equation tells us that the expected return on portfolio P
equals to the risk-free rate plus the factor risk
premium multiplied by the factor loadings.
In our case of the two-factor model,
the expected return in the portfolio P
equals the risk-free rate plus the price of the first factor,
lambda 1, multiplied by the loading of portfolio P
on this first factor, beta P1.
Plus the price of the second risk factor, lambda 2,
multiplied by the loading of this portfolio P
on the second risk factor, beta P2.
Let's write this equation specifically
for our portfolios starting with portfolio
A. The expected return on portfolio A
equals to the risk-free rate plus lambda 1 multiplied
by the loading of portfolio A on the first factor,
plus lambda 2 multiplied by the loading of portfolio A
on the second factor.
We are given the expected return on portfolio A, which is 4%,
and the factor loadings on factors one and two, which
are 0 and 1, respectively.
Therefore, we have the following equation.
4% equals RF, plus lambda 1 multiplied by 0,
plus lambda 2 multiplied by 1.
Given the expected returns and factor loadings of portfolios B
and C, we can now write the second and third equations
that correspond to portfolios B and C, respectively.
This gives us a system of three equations with three unknowns.
The unknowns are the risk-free rate and the factor risk
premium.
Solving this system would get the following.
The risk-free rate is 2%, the risk premium
on the market factor is 6%, and the risk premium on gold is 2%.
Knowing the risk-free rate and factor risk premia,
we can find the expected return on Kinross Gold,
which is the estimate of its cost of capital.
Recall that Kinross Gold's loading on the market is 0.3
and its loading on gold is 1.92.
These loadings, by the way, come from my video
in the first part of the course where
I explain how to estimate factor models empirically.
I recommend you to re-watch that video.
We find that the cost of capital for Kinross Gold is 7.64%.
Putting everything together we can find the current value
of Kinross Gold.
It is $10.51 billion.
This is what the private equity fund
should be willing to pay in order to acquire this firm.
