
PROFESSOR: This example provides a quantitative illustration
of the effect of the assumed default
correlation on the pricing and yields of different CDO
tranches.
The simple CDO here is based on just two underlying nodes,
both zero coupon with one year maturities.
The first has a principal or face value of 100.
And in the event it defaults, the estimated recovery is $50.
It's priced at $95 in the market.
The second node has a principal or face value of $200.
And in the event of default, the expected recovery
is 40% or $80.
It's priced at 179.50.

Let's assume that the one-year LIBOR rate is 2%
and that it represents the appropriate risk-free rate
for these calculations.
From this information, as a first step,
we can impute an implied risk-neutral probability
of default for each of the nodes from the equations here
equating the expected risk-neutral payoff discounted
at the risk-free rate to the observed market
price of each bond.

Risk-neutral expected payoff discounted back
when period for node one implies a risk-neutral probability
of 6.2%.
And for node two, the imputed risk-neutral probability
is 14.1%.
These imputed default probabilities in themselves
imply nothing about the correlation between default
on the two nodes.
One way to incorporate the effect of correlation
is to make an assumption about the probability of defaults
occurring simultaneously.
Let's first assume that the joint probability of default
is 1%.
With that assumption, we can infer the probability
of every possible outcome.
One is that only the first node defaults.
That equals the probability that node
one defaults minus the probability that they
both default, which is 6.2% minus the 1% joint probability
or 5.2%.

The second possibility is that only node two defaults.
That equals the probability that node
two defaults minus the joint probability, which
is 14.1% minus 1%, or 13.1%.
Again, the probability that they both default is 1%.
And now, the last possibility is that neither defaults.
And that's equal to 100% minus the probability
that there's any other combination of defaults,
and the result is that the probability of no default
is 80.7%.
Now, let's turn to the CDO structure.
The payoffs are divided into three tranches--
a senior tranche of 220 principal, a mezzanine tranche
of 60 principal, and a junior tranche of 20 principal.

This table summarizes the payoffs and probabilities
and the calculation of implied prices and yields
for each of the tranches.
The four possible scenarios with their associated probabilities
and total payouts are shown on the left here.

The next portion of the table reflects a waterfall
of the total payments, which go to the senior tranche
first, then to the mezzanine tranche
if payouts exceed $220, and finally, to the junior equity
tranche if payouts exceed $280.
For example, the senior tranche is paid in full
if there's no defaults or if only node one defaults.

It receives a payment of 180 if only
node two defaults and a payment of 130 if both nodes default.
We can weight each of those outcomes by the probability
of that outcome to get an expected risk-neutral payout
of 213.80.
The junior tranche is only paid if no default occurs.
In which case, it gets 16.1 and that occurs with a probability
0.807.
So the expected payout is 16.10.
To get from those expected payouts to the price,
the prices are found by discounting
those risk-neutral expected payouts by the risk-free rate.

The implied yield as an annual percentage rate
is found then as the ratio of the promised payment
to the price minus 1.

The yield on the senior tranche is 2.9% higher
than the risk-free rate, which reflects that it will not be
fully repaid in some scenarios.
The yields on the mezzanine and junior tranches
are very high, because the expected payouts are much lower
than the promised payouts.
To see the effect of increasing the default correlation,
we can do the same analysis but under the assumption
of a higher probability that both nodes
will default at the same time.
Increasing that probability will also
increase the likelihood of no default, which we will expect
will help the junior tranche.
We also expect it will hurt the senior tranche
by increasing the size of the expected losses there.
Let's see what happens when we increase
the probability of both nodes defaulting simultaneously
from 1% to 3% and keep everything else
as it was before.
Recomputing the probability of every possible outcome
has the expected result that the probability
of both nodes defaulting is higher
and so is the probability of neither node defaulting.
The probability of just one node defaulting is lower.
This table redoes all of the previous calculations based
on the 3% joint probability of default. As we expected,
the estimated value of the junior tranche increases
and the value of the senior tranche
falls relative to when the correlation was lower
and the implied yields change commensurately.
Notice that, in this example, I simply made an assumption
about the joint probability of default.
There are a number of statistical approaches
that have been developed to estimate default correlations
that are discussed in the whole textbook
and also in other sources.
There are several takeaways I'd like
you to get from this analysis.
The first is that it's critical to take into account default
correlation and pricing CDOs or similar structures.
When we discussed credit risk last week,
we saw how defaults historically are
highly concentrated in recessions, which
means that, in fact, there is a positive default
correlation across bonds and other risky loans.
The second takeaway is that this may be one reason
that, during the financial crisis of 2008,
there were unanticipated losses by holders
of senior claims on mortgage-backed securities.
Apparently, many market participants,
including credit rating agencies,
hadn't taken into account the positive default correlation
that led their models to overestimate
the value and the safety of the senior tranches
of mortgage-backed securities.
