
PROFESSOR: As I emphasized earlier,
pricing mortgages and MBSs is complicated
by having to model prepayment behavior.
Another complication is that credit risk and liquidity risk
also affect MBS prices but to a much lesser extent
than prepayment risk.
Earlier in the class, we saw how to price credit risk based
on a model of asset price volatility
and how to value callable bonds using a model
of stochastic interest rates.
The question arises, what's the best procedure
to use when both call and credit risk are present?
For MBS pricing in a binomial framework,
my recommendation is to model the uncertainty associated
with interest rates explicitly and then
to incorporate other factors that affect value
like credit and liquidity via an assumption about a market
spread over the risk-free rate.
The final example I'm about to turn to
illustrates that procedure.
In cases where default risk is judged to be insignificant,
for instance, because there's a credit guarantee,
this is a reasonable approach.
However, I want to note that in instances where both interest
rate and default risk are important,
it's probably best to use a risk-neutral Monte
Carlo with two stochastic processes, one
for each major source of risk.
I now want to turn to a simple binomial example that
captures the idea of pricing MBS on an interest rate
tree augmented by a statistical model of pre-payment.
In this example, I'll start with this binomial tree here.
It represents the evolution of the risk-free rate.
For simplicity, I'm going to assume that all paths are
equally likely.
For each path through the interest rate tree
imagine linking it to a pre-payment model that
is a function of market interest rates, when rates go down,
prepayment rates go up.
On paths where past prepayments are higher,
future cash payouts will be lower
because interest payments are reduced
and there will be less principal left to pay off.
The story provides a loose motivation
for the patterns of cash flows shown on each path
through this tree, that is I assume the payment at time 1
is expected to be $100 given the current market conditions
at time 0.
When rates rise at time 1 there is no change in the expected
payment size at time 2 but when rates fall,
there's an additional prepayment of $50 expected at time 2.
When rates rise from time 1 to time 2, the payment at time 3
is lower than if rates fall over that interval,
again reflecting more prepayments when rates fall.
Because MBSs are illiquid and there may be some default risk,
investors demand a spread above the risk-free rate.
Let's assume we estimate that spread to be 0.25%.
This slide shows that spread added to all the rates
on the previous tree.
The cash flows are the same as before.

The final step in valuing the MBS is to discount the cash
flows back along each path of the tree
using the risk-adjusted rates on the tree for discounting
and taking into account the probability of each path.
Notice that in this example, MBSs
are like exotic options with path dependence.
The conclusion we reach averaging
across all the paths, which remember
were assumed to be equally likely,
is that the security is worth $269.81.
We've come to the end of this lecture
and also to the end of the class.
I want to thank all of you who have put in the effort
to understand this challenging material
and to learn how to apply the ideas
and models to a wide variety of practical applications.
I hope these skills serve you well
in your future financial endeavors
personal and professional.
And I wish you success on the final and beyond.
