
PROFESSOR: Let's take a look at some common MBS
structures and the motivations behind creating them.

Passthrough securities are the oldest and simplest structures
for mortgage-backed securities.
As their name suggests, these securities
have cash flows that are distributed proportionally
to the principal value of each security holder.
The repayment of principal and accrued interest
is generally guaranteed.
The main benefit of this structure,
relative to investing in home mortgages,
is diversification of prepayment risk, which
makes the securities less risky and easier
to price, which in turn also makes them more liquid.
This diagram gives a stylized example
of the structure of a passthrough securitization.
Here, each mortgage loan is assumed
to have principal of $200,000, and the total pool
has principal of $1 million based on having five loans.
Each month, the borrowers make payments
that consist of interest and principal that comes due.
Plus, they may choose to prepay some principal.
The pooled cash flows are then distributed
to investors proportionately, or pro-rata,
to their principal claim, which is reduced over time
by principal repayments.
Assuming there's a guarantee against default losses,
from an investor perspective, a default
has the same effect of prepayment.
That is, default results in an immediate return of principal
to investors that equals the balance of the defaulted loan.
Collateralized mortgage obligations, or CMOs,
have a wide variety of structures, some of which
are listed on the slide.
The strategy of issuers is to carve up the cash flows
to appeal to a variety of investor clienteles.
Some investors can tolerate more risk
than others in the timing and size of the cash flows
received.
Some prefer shorter maturities, and some
prefer longer maturities.
Well, starting with sequential pay structures,
those offer different average maturities
in the different tranches.
CMOs that include planned amortization,
or targeted amortization classes, PACs and TACs,
create securities with very predictable cash flows
as long as prepayment rates stay within the range of upper
and lower bounds that are specified in the contracts.
Now, in order to provide that certainty
to holders of TACs and PACs, other securities,
which are called support classes,
are structured to absorb the variation in prepayment rates
within that range.
They receive proportionally larger payments
when prepayment rates are high and proportionally smaller
payments when prepayment rates are low.
In exchange for absorbing that risk,
the yield on those support classes
is typically higher than on PACs or TACs.
Another type of restructuring is to break fixed rate payments
into two pieces, a floater and an inverse floater.
The sum of the cash flows on the floater and the inverse floater
equal the fixed rate payment.
The floater has a payment that's positively
related to a short term rate like LIBOR,
and the inverse floater receives a payment
based on a fixed rate minus the short term rate.
Inverse floaters can be attractive to investors
that want to invest in securities with a very long
effective duration, and floaters appeal to investors
seeking shorter durations.

You probably remember from your introductory finance courses
that the Modigliani-Miller theorem for capital structures
says that the weighted average yield on all
of these securities should be based
on the fair rate of return for the underlying mortgage assets.
If that were literally true, there
would be no point in creating these complicated structures
because it wouldn't lower cost.
Well, although the MM theorem is a good first approximation,
and it's an important reminder that there shouldn't
be any big, free lunches here, the overall cost
of mortgage capital can be reduced
by catering to different preferences
across investors for liquidity, safety,
and the timing of cash flows.
This diagram provides a simple example of a sequential pay
structure the pool has the same five underlying mortgage loans
that we looked at in the last example
with a total value of $1 million.
Here, are the securities issued against those cash flows
from the mortgages are structured into four
tranches or classes, A, B, C, and Z.
Each month, there are scheduled principal, scheduled interest,
and prepayments.
Rather than being distributed evenly across the security
holders, the principle goes towards repaying the Class A
securities until those securities are completely paid
off.
Then it goes to paying off Class B And so on down the stack.
The interest that comes in each month
is distributed proportionally to the remaining principal in each
of the classes A, B, and C. The Z class, which is effectively
an equity tranche, receives no payments until the A, B, and C
securities are fully paid off, after which,
it gets any accumulated interest and the remaining payments.
In terms of effective duration, clearly,
it's also ordered by class, being lowest for Class A
and highest for Class Z. The amount of uncertainty
in the timing of cash flows is also increasing across classes,
with modest uncertainty for the A class and considerable
uncertainty for the Z's.
The reason for that is that the payments on the A class
consist largely of scheduled principal and interest
payments, which are quite predictable, whereas over time,
the importance of volatile prepayments
becomes the most important factor.
IOs and POs are interest-only and principle-only securities.
Like other MBS, they're derivatives on a pool
of underlying mortgages.
They're structured so that the holders of IO securities
only get interest payments, and holders of PO securities
only get principal payments.
Beyond being split between principal and interest,
IOs and POs may be further structured
into PACs, TACs, and support classes,
or into sequential or other structures.
The effect of interest rate changes
is quite different for IOs and POs.
Let's start with IOs and consider
a fall in interest rates.
That has two effects.
There's the usual present value effect
that raises the value of the IO because future fixed payments
are discounted at a lower rate.
However, an offsetting effect is that lower rates speed up
prepayment.
Prepayment is very bad for an IO because when principal
is no longer outstanding, no interest payments
will be made on it.
The effects of prepayment increases when rates fall
means that at least over some range of interest rates,
IOs may be expected to fall in value when rates fall.
That means they have negative effective duration
in that range, which may make them attractive to investors
looking for securities with negative duration
in a long position.
For POs, the effect of prepayment is the opposite.
It causes the return of principal
to happen sooner, which increases
the present value of PO claims.
For POs, the usual discounting effect of interest rate changes
works in the same direction as the prepayment effect, which,
together, causes them to have a longer effective duration
than the underlying mortgages.
