
PROFESSOR: For securities like CDOs and CLOs,
the main function of securitization
is to diversify and restructure credit risk.
We'll focus on CDOs since the considerations
are similar for other credit-sensitive
securitizations.
It's common to describe CDOs as involving
a waterfall of cash flows generated
by the pool of underlying securities.
The securitization allocates those cash flows
to different tranches or classes of securities,
starting with the most senior, going next
to the junior, or mezzanine, classes,
and finally going to the holders of the equity tranche
if cash flows are sufficiently large.
The width of the different tranches
will depend on the riskiness of the underlying
pool of debt securities.
The riskier the securities, the larger
the equity and mezzanine tranches
relative to super senior tranche,
which is intended to be very well protected from defaults.
If the super senior tranche is set at 100%,
it's safe to assume that the underlying debt pool will have
a credit guarantee from a third party insurer,
or from the government.
The term notional here refers to the principal value
of the loans in the pool.
Two more definitions to be aware of, involving more exotic CDO
structures, synthetic CDOs are constructed with reference
to a pool of loans in a credit index.
A CDO squared is a CDO backed by the cash flows
from a pool of CDO securities rather than
by the pooled cash flows of underlying debt securities.
This diagram is an example of a typical CDO structure.
Imagine that there are $100 million
in principal of the bonds underlying the CDO.
The average credit rating of those bonds is BBB.
The CDOs structured with the super senior tranche having
a notional principal of $70 million,
the senior tranche getting the next $20,
then the mezzanine tranche at $7,
and equity with principal of $3 million.
The actual cash flows that come in
will go first to pay back the super senior securities, next,
the senior securities, and so forth.
Because it's extremely likely that
the super senior securities will be repaid in full,
they receive AAA rating.
Rating agencies also judge the senior securities
to be very unlikely to take losses and assign
a rating of AA.
The mezzanine securities receive a BBB rating,
the same as on the original bonds,
and the equity is unrated.
It may seem at first like alchemy to you
that a pool of BBB bonds could be restructured
to create such a large portion of securities carrying a AA,
or even a AAA, rating.
The reason that's possible is, first,
because the risk is being concentrated onto the mezzanine
and particularly, onto the equity tranches.
Second, the risk in a pool of bonds
is lower than for individual bonds
because of the diversification of the idiosyncratic default
risk across bonds.
Notice, too, that this looks a lot like the balance sheet
of a firm with risky assets that has
liabilities structured to consist
of safe debt and risky equity.
So there's nothing unusual about transferring asset risk along
with a commensurate difference in expected return
to leveraged equity holders.
This reference I'm making to the capital structure of a firm
is also intended to alert you to the fact
that the Merton model, and extensions to it,
can be used to price the claims arising from a CDO.
This diagram summarizes the conclusions
about the distribution of risk.
The dark bars show the notional share
of principle held by the different tranches,
whereas the light bars represent the proportion of risk absorbed
by each of the tranches.
Most of the risk falls onto the equity tranche and some
onto the mezzanine trusts, which here
is shown as being further divided between more
or less senior claims.
Very little of the risk falls onto the senior or super senior
tranches.
Before turning to a numerical example,
I want to say a few more words about the mechanisms used
for credit risk transfer.
In a CDO structure, the transfer of most of the credit risk
is to the equity tranche, and that's described
as overcollateralization.
The idea is that the $100 in principle
overcollateralized the rated securities issued
against the pool, in this case, by $3.
An alternative to overcollateralization
is to obtain a guarantee from a credit enhancer.
There are both private sector and public sector suppliers
of credit enhancement.
On the private sector side, insurance companies and banks
sell protection in exchange for a premium,
effectively selling credit default options,
or credit default swaps.
Often, governments also provide credit guarantees
that substitute for the need for equity protection.
That's common in the US residential mortgage market
where Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and other federal agencies
absorb the credit risk on most mortgages that are securitized.
Credit enhancement can add value by allowing investors
without credit expertise to feel comfortable
buying these securities with credit risk.
Credit enhancement also improves a securities credit
rating and more highly-rated securities
tend to be more liquid.
