
PROFESSOR: Outside securitization
is a process of collecting and pooling financial assets,
such as loans, and then selling securities
that are solely backed by the cash
flows from the asset pools.
These securities are called asset backed securities,
or ABS, because each pool is backed
by specific and segregated collateral
assets with no recourse to the issuers of the underlying
assets.
Clearly, securitization involves the creation
of derivative securities.
That is, the securities and securitization
are derivatives on the pool of assets that
are backing the securities.
As with futures and options, examples of securitization
can be found that date back many centuries.
However, the modern history of securitization
started in the 1970s with the first mortgage securitizations
by Ginnie Mae, a US government entity created
to securitize residential mortgages that
were purchased or insured by the federal government.
The generic term for mortgage securitization products
is MBS, which stands for mortgage backed securities.
There are two broad and distinct subcategories of MBS--
residential, or RMBS, which is backed by mortgages made
to individual homeowners, and commercial MBS, or CMBS,
backed by mortgages on commercial property
like offices, hotels, and large apartment complexes.
The residential MBS market is the much larger of the two,
and it will be our focus here.
Other terms frequently used to describe certain types of MBS
is CMO or REMIC.
CMO stands for collateralized mortgage obligation.
REMIC stands for real estate mortgage investment conduit.
These terms frequently apply to some of the more
highly structured securitizations
that generate securities with a variety of risk and return
characteristics.
Beyond mortgages, the collateral backing securitizations often
is composed of loans or debt.
Those securities are called collateralized loan or debt
obligations, CLO or CDOs.
Beyond those broad categories, just about
any financial obligation can, in principle at least,
be securitized, and a growing number of assets
have been securitized.
Some of those asset classes are listed here.
As you'd expect, the costs of creating, modeling, valuing,
and marketing more novel securitization products
is much higher than for more established and liquid
offerings.
Because of those costs, new types
of securitization products usually
only come into being when there is a specific need that can't
be met with existing products.

This diagram describes the general process
of creating an asset backed security.
The assets backing a securitization could
come from a single lender or the securitization
could pool together loans made by several different lenders.
The top box, borrowers, let's think of them
as car buyers who take out loans to buy their cars,
represents the loans that will be securitized.
The borrowers go to a loan originator, the second box,
which could be a bank or a finance company.
The bank or finance company might service the loan itself,
meaning it bills and collects payments
even after the loans have been securitized,
or the servicing rights could be sold to a third party servicer.
When the originating bank or finance company
wants to securitize the loans it's made,
the next step is to go to a securitizer that will set up
a special purpose trust.
Selling the loans into that trust
makes the loans bankruptcy remote from the originator
and so insulated from the originator's other activities
and obligations.
The securitizer, often an investment bank,
may pay a rating agency a fee to provide a credit rating
for the securities that are issued
against the pool of loans in the trust.
In some cases, some or all of the credit risk associated
with the loans are insured by an insurance company or bank which
receives a fee in exchange.
The securitizer will also decide how to structure
the securities that are issued.
Here, the role of structuring and selling the securities
is represented by the box labeled Underwriter.
The final step is to sell the securities created to investors
that are typically institutions like pension and mutual funds.

From the 1980s through the financial crisis of 2008,
securitization grew exponentially in the US,
and it also grew quite rapidly in Europe.
Those markets shrank following the crisis,
but most have rebounded and growth has resumed.
Global issuance in 2020 was estimated by S&P Global
to be about $830 billion.
What caused this rapid growth and continuing popularity?
A case can be made that securitization increases
the efficiency of debt markets for a variety of reasons,
including improving risk sharing and risk restructuring that
concentrates risk on investors most able to manage it.
Others though have pointed to the use of securitization
as a way for financial institutions
to avoid certain regulations or as a response to the incentives
created by regulation, such as to reduce the size of bank
balance sheets.

I want to briefly go over the reasons
that securitization can add value to the economy and lower
borrowing costs.
The natural comparison is to what
happens when lending is done traditionally through a bank.
A traditional bank loan bundles all the services
associated with lending into a single institution.
That includes origination, servicing,
collection of defaulted loans, and funding.
With securitization, those functions
can be divided between different entities that specialize
in a particular service.
Specialization can create economies of scale
and other cost efficiencies.
Individual loans can also be very illiquid,
in part because there's a lot of uncertainty associated
with their performance.
For that reason, banks traditionally
didn't sell the loans that they made.
Pooling a large number of loans makes the outcomes
more predictable because of a diversification effect,
and therefore the securitized loans
are more liquid than the individual loans.
Further, structuring can create even more liquidity.

For securitizations that result in securities
that are traded in the OTC market,
there's price information available
that wouldn't be there with privately held bank debt.

Where some banks have limited access to funds
beyond their local markets, securitization
results in securities that are sold into national
and even international markets.
Broadening funding sources tends to lower the cost of funds.
Finally, by restructuring risk and return,
securitization creates a wide variety
of choices for investors.
By seeking to create a variety of payoff structures
to appeal to the widest possible universe of investors,
funding costs are also reduced.

Securitization also creates new problems.
Asymmetric information, which is the fact that issuers know more
about borrowers than do investors
in the securitization, creates several problems.
The first is adverse selection.
Adverse selection is the problem that lenders
will want to sell their worst loans into the securitization
and keep their best loans on their balance sheets.
There are several mechanisms that help
to limit adverse selection.
One is to impose strict criteria for the loans that
are sold into securitizations.
For example, maximum loan-to-value
ratios for mortgages or credit ratings above a certain cutoff.
Another is that it's a repeated game between originators
and the investment bank structuring
the securitizations.
If a particular originator is found to sell consistently
subpar loans, it may be excluded from market
or receive lower prices for its loans.
A second information related problem is moral hazard.
An important function of originators
is to screen out borrowers that aren't creditworthy.
If an originator knows it's going to sell a loan,
it may be lazy about doing the necessary due diligence
to make sure that the borrower is, in fact, creditworthy.
Again, the greatest protection against this
is the repeated game nature of the transactions.
A lender that's not careful to screen out bad borrowers
may find itself blocked out of the securitization market.

A third type of risk that's important to be aware of
is called model risk.
Securitization can often create very complicated rules
for how cash flows are distributed between claimants,
and it's difficult to accurately model
the price of the more exotic securities that are created.
That creates a winner's curse situation
where the likely buyers will be the investors whose
models produce the most optimistic valuations.
Investors may experience unanticipated losses,
as happened during the 2008 financial crisis.
Finally, investors may underestimate the illiquidity
of certain securities in a securitization,
particularly during times of market disruptions.
I should note that not only investors, but also regulators,
can be caught off guard by unanticipated losses
and their consequences.
Because those risks can impact overall financial stability,
regulators have sought to limit certain securitization
practices that have the potential to be destabilizing.
