
INSTRUCTOR: We'll now turn to the largest securitization
market, the MBS market.

A mortgage is a loan backed by real estate,
either residential, commercial, or undeveloped land.
I'll focus on US residential mortgages,
which make up the largest part of the MBS market.
The institutional and regulatory features
of the US residential mortgage market
have influenced how MBSs are structured,
and also they affect the supply and demand for the securities.
Mortgages in the US are primarily
fixed-rate amortizing loans, most with an initial maturity
of 30 or 15 years.
Various adjustable rate options also exist.
What makes most fixed-rate mortgages particularly
risky for investors is that they're typically
prepayable without penalty.
The option to prepay is an embedded call option
whose value depends on the volatility of mortgage interest
rates and other factors.
Most residential mortgages in the US
are securitized by Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, or Ginnie Mae,
which are government entities.
Jumbo, very large, and other mortgages
that don't qualify for purchase by those federal agencies
are primarily held on the balance sheets of banks.
Although, in principle, they could also be
securitized, and have been in the past.
Mortgage investors are exposed to a number of risks.
First, there's credit default risk.
Credit risk is mitigated by the value of the real estate that
serves as collateral, and typical credit loss rates
are quite low.
In securitizations, credit risk is further
reduced by a third-party guarantee,
often from a federal agency.
Interest rate risk can be a significant source of risk
on longer term mortgages.
Recall that interest rate risk exposure
is proportional to duration.
Because mortgages are frequently prepaid long
before their final maturity, the operative measure
of their first order exposure to interest rate risk
is effective duration.
For example, a 30-year mortgage typically
would have an effective duration of seven years or less.
As mentioned earlier, prepayment risk
arises because of the embedded call option.
When rates fall sufficiently, homeowners
have an incentive to refinance their mortgage
at the new lower rates.
The flip side of prepayment risk is called extension risk.
That risk also arises because of the embedded call option.
Extension risk refers to the fact
that in a rising interest rate environment,
homeowners will prepay more slowly than anticipated.
That's to the disadvantage of investors
that would benefit under those conditions
from quicker prepayments, so they
could reinvest their money at the new higher interest rates.
The combination of prepayment and extension risk,
or equivalently, the embedded call option,
causes mortgages to have negative convexity.

Interest rate and prepayment risk
can be hedged with delta or delta-gamma hedging,
using the cash market or interest rate derivatives,
like swaps.
In fact, the large portion of interest rate
swap market volume can be attributed to hedging mortgage
risk.
Finally, mortgages and MBSs have liquidity risk.
The liquidity of different securities in the same MBS
structure can be considerably different,
with the riskier securities typically
being the least liquid.

The typical steps in a mortgage securitization
are similar to the ones described earlier
for other asset-backed securities.
First, a commercial bank, mortgage broker, or thrift
originates the mortgage loan.
Second, the originator sells the loan to the securitizer.
In the case of mortgages, typically Fannie Mae,
Freddie Mac, or Ginnie Mae.
The securitizer serves a number of functions,
including creating a security backed
by a pool of similar mortgages, guaranteeing
timely payment of principal and interest,
and selling the asset-backed securities to the market.

As for any security, an MBS price
is just the present value of expected future cash
flows, discounted at appropriate risk-adjusted rates.
However, for MBS, due to the difficulty
of predicting prepayment behavior,
and the complexity of some of the securities,
cash flows can be challenging to model.
Relatedly, identifying the appropriate risk-adjusted
discount rates is also tricky.
A derivatives pricing approach can
be useful for valuing the embedded default and prepayment
options, which are both American-style options.
However, complications arise because
of the complexity of default and prepayment behavior.
Unlike the American options we've talked about before now,
typically exercise behavior can't
be inferred by analyzing what exercise policy would minimize
the cost of mortgage financing.

A complete discussion of modeling mortgage prepayment
would fill an entire lecture.
So I just want to highlight a few important ideas.
Prior to the very large losses from mortgage defaults that
contributed to the failure of many financial institutions
in the 1980s and again in the 1990s,
prepayment modeling was an afterthought.
A simple but inadequate representation of prepayment
would be to assume a constant annual
or a constant monthly prepayment rate
over the life of the mortgage.

Despite the inadequacy of a constant prepayment rate
assumption, a standard tool used to describe rather than
to predict prepayment rates is called the PSA model.

It assumes a constant prepayment rate after 30 months.
I'll say more about it on the next slide.
The negative correlation between prepayment and interest rates,
and the effect of that on value, makes a constant rate
assumption inadequate for pricing mortgages.
The state of the art in prepayment modeling
is to take a statistical approach.
Analysis of historical data shows that prepayment rates
are related to loan characteristics, such as loan
size, coupon rate, and the age of the mortgage.
It's related to borrower characteristics,
such as location and income, and to market characteristics,
such as the current interest rate
and the loan-to-value ratio, which varies
with the level of house prices.
Statistical models that aim to simultaneously predict
prepayment and default behavior also take
into account that the two are competing
hazards, in that a loan that has defaulted won't prepay,
and the loan that has prepaid can't default.
My own experience with estimating
these models is to warn you that the parameters tend
to be quite unstable, varying significantly year to year.
That creates a danger of overfitting.
I want to emphasize, though, that
despite these difficulties, it makes much more sense to use
statistical models of prepayment than to assume optimizing
models of prepayment.
Mortgage borrowers' decisions about whether to prepay
or to default are complicated by other factors outside
of any model, such as wanting to sell their house, whether they
qualify for refinancing, or the considerable transactions costs
incurred when refinancing a mortgage.
Those complications are captured, indirectly,
using a statistical modeling approach.
This graph illustrates the PSA model,
which is commonly used to communicate assumptions
about mortgage prepayment rates, rather than to predict them.
For instance, you'll see it mentioned
in offering documents for a mortgage securitization
in the context of explaining the risk of cash
flows for different tranches.
100% PSA assumes that the annual prepayment rate ramps up
linearly from 0 immediately after origination, to 6%
after 30 months.
The reason for the ramp up is that it's
unusual to refinance or sell a house shortly after taking out
a new mortgage, but the likelihood of those actions
increases over time, until it eventually plateaus.
Again, this is not a prediction of repayment rates.
Often, market conditions have much higher prepayment rates
than 100% PSA.
If the rate was described as 200% of PSA, for example,
that means that the prepayment rate ramps up linearly,
from 0 to 12%, 2 times 6%, over 30 months,
and then flattens out at that 12% rate.
