
PROFESSOR: An important driver of risk in CDOs
is the default correlation between the bonds
and the reference portfolio of credits.
Sophisticated investors may choose
to speculate on this default correlation,
choosing to invest in different tranches,
depending on how their view of default correlation
affects their perception of the risk-adjusted value
of the different tranches.
To begin to understand the effects of default correlation,
let's consider the loss distribution
in each tranche as a function of the correlation of defaults
across pairs of bonds in the underlying portfolio.
One possibility is a correlation of 1,
which means either that all bonds default or none of them
do.
In that case, the default risk affects all tranches similarly,
in that all would take losses in the event of a default
and all would receive full payment otherwise.
The distribution of losses on a risky portfolio
as a function of the degree of default correlation
can easily be illustrated via a simulation.
Assume a portfolio with 100 names, or bonds, each
with individual default probability of 14%.
We'll look at the distribution of total portfolio payoffs
when the correlation across defaults
is either 15%, 40%, or 100%.
The results of those simulations for the implied distribution
of portfolio losses are shown here.
When default correlation is low, there's
very little weight on the right tail of the distribution, where
default losses are the highest.
As default correlation increases,
the distribution spreads out, putting much more weight
on the very low loss rates, but also on very high loss rates.
The effect of the tails of the loss distributions getting
wider affects the various tranches quite differently
from one another.
The safer tranches are adversely affected
by an increase in correlation, because they only
experience a loss when total losses are very high,
and that becomes more likely.
By contrast, the equity tranche holders
are unaffected when large losses become more likely,
because over that range of outcomes
they already would have been wiped out.
Rather, they benefit from the increased probability
of the left tail, of no or very low default losses, which
is the situation in which they will receive
a full or partial payout.
As this graph shows, the equity and mezzanine tranches
are much more sensitive to the effect of correlation
than is the senior tranche, but its value is also
affected by correlation.
This description also explains why the equity tranches
are described as being long correlation,
since they benefit from an increase in default
correlation.
Conversely, the senior tranches are short correlation
since they're harmed if it increases.
