
PROFESSOR: When we optimize a portfolio of assets,
what we'd like to do is think about finding
an optimal trade-off of risk and return.
What do we have as a constraint?
Well, typically, we have a budget constraint.
We've got some amount of capital,
and we can assign weights to different risky assets,
let's say.
Let's call those weights w sub i for the weight, the fraction
of capital invested in asset i.
And, depending on what choices I make,
I'll earn a different return and have different levels of risk.
So, if we think of w as being a control variable that we're
free to choose, but it's subject to a constraint,
a budget constraint, where the sum of the weights
need to equal 1, we can ask the question about how do we
maximize return, how do we minimize risk,
provided that we've got appropriate measures
for both of them.
And then we can do this using the Lagrange multiplier method.
So we might think of the risk as being
related to the variance of the portfolio.
And the variance of the portfolio
for a weighted set of returns, as we've seen before,
is a quadratic form.
And here I've written it in vector notation.
It's w transpose times the covariance matrix, which
is the covariance matrix where the elements Cij are
the covariance between the returns on asset i and asset j,
times w again.
So it's quadratic in the w's, but
with lots of off-diagonal terms, potentially,
where the assets have correlations among themselves.
And the expected returns are just the weighted average
of the vector of expected returns
on the individual assets.
So C and mu correspond to the covariance and expected returns
on the individual assets.
Sigma squared p and mu p, the p stands for portfolio.
Those are based on a linear combination.
And w is the set of linear weighting factors
that we get to choose.
I will take mu to be excess returns in excess
of the risk-free rate so that we don't have a little minus r sub
f's to subtract off everywhere.
At least for the people who have taken finance courses,
you know that we always need to look at things
relative to the risk-free rate.
So this would be a problem that sounds
great for constraint optimization for the Lagrange
multiplier method.
What do we know about these different components?
Well, one thing that we know is that the covariance matrix can
be expanded out in terms of a quadratic sum,
in terms of diagonal terms that involve
only the variance of the individual assets
and that involve cross terms.
Notice that, in this expression, every time there's
a w that appears, it's always multiplied by a sigma.
So I have w1 sigma 1 quantity squared.
And here I might have w1 sigma 1 w2 sigma 2.
Those always appear together.
Rho ij is the correlation matrix.
So the covariance matrix is symmetric.
And it's symmetric because the variance and covariance
between asset i and asset j is the same as between j and i.
So it's obviously symmetric.
It's positive definite.
And it's positive-definite.
We know that it's positive because the variance is
obtained by taking the expectation
of a positive quantity.
So it must be positive.
And that means that, no matter what w's we put in there,
we're always going to get a positive quantity.
So this is a positive-definite matrix.
And that means that all of its eigenvalues are positive.
Now, we know that it can't be-- it has to be non-negative.
How do we know it's strictly positive?
Well, for the covariance matrix to have a zero eigenvalue,
that would mean that it's a singular matrix
and that it's not invertible.
And one reason that that could happen
is that we either have risk-free assets, which
have no correlation to anything else,
or that we have linearly dependent data sets.
Whenever there's a matrix where multiple rows or columns are
linearly dependent, the matrix is less than full rank.
It's not invertible.
And it has zero eigenvalues.
So we're going to specifically exclude those cases.
So we're going to assume that all of the assets
are linearly independent.
And that means that our matrix is
going to be positive-definite.
It's going to be symmetric.
And it's going to be invertible.
That also means that we could use
it to define a quadratic form on the vector space of weights w
if we wanted to think more broadly.
And we can use that to come up with kind
of a geometric picture of risk that we won't need
for our portfolio optimization, but, in this language,
we can think of looking at comparing
two different portfolios that are described by weight factors
w and w prime and say their inner product in this space
is related to the w transpose times C times w prime.
This is the inner product here.
And this vanishes.
We would say these two portfolios
are orthogonal if they are uncorrelated.
So that's just a convenient thing
that you could keep in mind for other applications,
but not required for portfolio variance.
And in a very simple, concrete case, we could get some data,
and we can visualize what we mean by an optimal portfolio
just by crunching some numbers without doing
this kind of algebra at all.
Here's an example.
Suppose I look at historical data,
and I take time series returns for a couple of assets,
in this case, the S&P 500 index, which
I've denoted by ticker symbol SPX,
and the gold ETF, the Exchange-Traded Fund whose
value is based on the deposits of gold.
And I wanted to know, what would be an optimal portfolio
to hold consisting of these two assets?
So what I can do is I can look at the time
series of historical returns.
And, as a function of the weight vectors,
I can compute what the portfolio returns were.
So I can say suppose I did a portfolio that
was 50-50, that was 90-10, that was 10-90, that was 40-60.
So, for each possible relative weighting of the two
where the weights have to add up to 1,
I can compute what the time series of returns was.
Now, there's really only one number
that matters, relative weight of the two,
because they satisfy a budget constraint.
The two numbers have to add up to 1.
So I can think of this as being a function
of a single variable, the relative weight,
say, of gold versus equities in this portfolio.
And I do want to be careful in thinking about this averaging
that, since I'm constructing my views based on past time
series, if I talk about, say, a 50-50 portfolio, if I'm just
going to take a 50-50 average of the two time series of returns,
that would mean that's not a buy-and-hold portfolio.
It implies that, in every time period,
say every month, that I'm rebalancing the portfolio back
to 50-50 so that that is indeed the portfolio return.
So, subject to those provisos, you can do the calculation.
And, if you do it, you get, for each value from, say,
0-100 to 100-0, if we're weighting between the two,
we could compute what the time series of returns is.
And then we could plot some objective function.
Perhaps, it's the Sharpe ratio, which is the expected return,
or the expected excess return above the risk-free rate,
divided by the standard deviation of the returns.
That's a scalar quantity that gets larger
when there are higher returns or when the risk is lower.
There are other functions we could consider instead,
but here I've plotted an example of Sharpe
ratio versus the fraction of gold that's in my portfolio.
And, just looking at this picture,
we can see that the Sharpe ratio gets better and better as I
increase gold up to a certain point, and then it goes down.
So this is fairly typical of what we might see.
And, obviously, the goal of optimization
would be to find this point.
This would be the optimal Sharpe ratio.
It's a particular choice of objective function
and not uniquely determined.
But, for that choice of objective function,
this would be the maximum value.
Now, for a different choice of function,
the maximum might be somewhere else.
If I looked at a different data set
over a different period of time, the values
might move because maybe the return samples
I have are not representative.
Maybe the return processes are not stationary.
And there are a couple of other things
that we know could happen based on what
we know about functions, even of a single variable.
There might be multiple extrema.
Could there be more than one maximum?
Could the maximum be at the endpoints?
Could it be either at 0 or 1?
Maybe the function is monotonically
increasing or decreasing.
And another possibility that's important financially
is, could there be extrema that are outside
of the obvious budget area?
I looked between 0% and 100%.
But if the weight--
if we continued this curve, suppose
it was increasing from the beginning and up to here,
and then it continued, and it peaked somewhere out here,
say at a value of 130% in gold and minus 30 in equities,
let's say.
That would correspond to a maximum which isn't achievable
if the w's need to be positive or bounded between 0 and 1,
but it would correspond to something
we could conceivably do in a levered portfolio
where we borrow money to be able to invest more money than we
initially have in our account and where
we take short positions that would be represented
by negative weights.
So here, in the picture I've drawn,
we have an obvious solution that lies--
it satisfies the budget constraint,
and it lies in a range where w is between 0 and 1
without imposing any additional rules on bounds.
So it's an interior extremum point.
So that's just a visualization.
Next, we'd like to take a look at applying
this systematically for portfolios that may
have many more than two assets.
