
PROFESSOR: Here's our first portfolio problem.
Let's find a minimum-variance portfolio.
So let's set up our Lagrange function as follows.
Let's take a look at a Lagrange function
that depends on a vector of weights.
And the function that I'd like to minimize
would be the variance.
And the variance, as we've seen, is given by w
transpose time the covariance matrix times w.
I'm throwing a 1/2 in front just to make it a little bit easier
when I take derivatives of a quadratic function
because I care more about the location of the extrema
than I do about the value of the Lagrange function.
So, if this is minimized, one half of it
is also minimized as well.
Over here, I have my constraint.
And, by the way, l is completely arbitrary.
So, if I divide it by 1/2 or multiply it by 3,
it's not going to change anything either.
The definition of this is arbitrary,
but, once we pick a definition for l, we need to leave it.
So here I've written in vector form the constraint
that these weights need to add up to 1.
And I've done this with a particular construction, which
is a little unfortunate in my opinion,
but it's in the literature in various places.
So I'm going to stick to this so you'll
recognize it if you see it.
We're going to use the Greek letter iota,
which looks like an i missing its dot,
to represent a vector of 1's.
So it's just 1, 1, 1, 1, 1 for the number of assets
I have, whether it's 2 or 30 or 500, OK?
So iota represents a vector of 1's.
And, of course, if I take its transpose,
it becomes a row vector.
And the row vector of 1's times a column vector of w1, w2, w3
just gives me the sum of the weights.
So the sum of the weights is given by iota transpose w.
And that needs to be equal to 1.
So I've written the constraint in this form times the Lagrange
multiplier.
Remember, we expect the Lagrange multiplier method
in any number of dimensions to enforce the constraint.
The equation of the partial with respect to l
is equal to 0 is going to tell us the constraint needs
to be satisfied.
So l is my Lagrange multiplier.
Iota is a constant.
It's just a vector of 1's.
And C is the covariance matrix, which
we're assuming to be given.
So this is an interesting idea.
We want to solve the minimum-variance portfolio.
And why do we need a constraint?
Well, if we didn't have the constraint,
the minimum variance would be don't invest.
If you keep all your money under your mattress,
there's no risk at all.
You'd definitely have minimum variance.
Now, you might ask, why would you
want to find the minimum-variance portfolio?
It sounds useful, but this is all about risk and nothing
about return.
So, if there were no return on these assets,
it's not at all clear why you would
want to have a minimum-variance portfolio.
Why are you investing if there's no benefit
for taking this risk?
If you are forced to invest and you're
forced to have your weight vector fully deployed
in risky assets, then this will be
the minimum-variance portfolio.
But this isn't just a mathematical thing.
People do this, and there are funds
that trade based on this idea of minimum variance.
Why do they do it?
Well, one idea is that we're leaving out the return.
So we could say, well, people obviously
expect to earn a return.
What assumption implicitly about returns
would lead to this case?
One of them would be, if you thought
the average return on assets was 0,
then maybe you shouldn't be investing at all.
Another case would be where you thought that you
couldn't tell anything.
You thought that they're positive on average,
but you don't have any skill in predicting them.
That would at least be coherent.
And, finally, you might say, well,
I do have an estimate for the expected returns,
but I'm going to make the same estimate for all the returns.
And, in that case, this comes out just as a special case.
But let's just take it as given and look at it
as a mathematical exercise for a moment.
So we have a constraint.
We need to be fully invested.
The sum of the w's needs to be equal to 1.
Subject to that constraint, given
a set of variances and covariances,
how do we find the portfolio that has minimum variance?
Remember, this is in a very high-dimensional vector space.
So w could be 500 components if we're in the S&P 500.
It could have thousands of components
if we're in the US markets.
It could have tens of thousands of components
if we're in global markets.
So, in this very, very high-dimensional space,
we're looking for this.
So, for any given vector, we plug it in,
and we get a number for the variance.
And we have this single number that we need to extremize.
We want to find the minimum value
over all of the possible vectors in this very
large-dimensional space.
Let's go.
So what we'd like to do is differentiate with respect
to each of the variables, each of the w sub i's.
So, for each component, we take a partial derivative,
and we set it equal to 0, plus we have one partial derivative
that we set equal to 0 through the Lagrange multiplier.
And, if you'd like, you can write this out in components
and do it as well.
Now, as we vary the weights, remember
that we have a quadratic form in the weights w.
So, as I vary the weights with respect
to a particular w sub i, I'm going
to have a whole bunch of terms, depending
on all the cross terms and the diagonal terms itself.
So, if I vary with respect to, say, w1,
I'm going to have C1,1, but I'm also going to have C1,2 times
w2 and C1,3 times w3 and all possible combinations.
So I can write this as a sum over all values j
in the portfolio times the matrix element Cij wj minus l.
And I'm going to write this in matrix notation.
Even though, iota, they're all 1's, I'm
going to write it as iota sub i.
And the reason is that then I can write this--
I can recognize this as being a vector equation.
So this right-hand side is the same
as the component of the equation that
says that C acting on the vector w
is equal to the vector iota times l.
So how do I solve that?
Let's just multiply in the left and right sides by C inverse.
And we get this solution here.
w is C inverse times iota times some constant l.
In fact, right now, we know almost all we need to know.
We know that the weights are proportional to the inverse
covariance matrix times the vector of 1's.
So, to fix the proportionality constant,
well, we can do it the fancy way.
We can take i transpose and multiply it on the left,
a row vector times w.
That gives us l time iota transpose C inverse iota.
And set that equal to 1.
And solve for it.
So l is going to be 1 over iota transpose C inverse iota.
These things, these expressions, we'll see a few more of them.
They look complicated, but, keep in mind,
they're really just scalars.
They're just numbers.
So they don't have any variables in them.
It's row vector times a square matrix times a column vector,
so a symmetric matrix also.
So these are just numbers.
So we've got a solution so that the w
for the minimum-variance portfolio
is going to be C inverse iota divided by this constant.
And now we can see what this constant does.
We really just divided by the sum of the weights.
And that means that the weights add up to 1.
And you can see that because, if you
act on this expression on the left by an iota transpose,
the numerator and denominator become the same.
And we get that it's equal to 1.
What does that mean in financial terms?
Well, consider a special case where the covariance matrix
is diagonal.
So suppose that all the assets are independent of each other,
but they each have their own variance.
So the covariance matrix in that case
has the variances down the diagonal,
sigma 1 squared, sigma 2 squared, sigma 3 squared,
and so on.
And, in this case, C inverse times iota
tells us that all of the weights in the minimum-variance
portfolio are going to be proportional to 1
over the variance.
So, special case, Cij diagonal, and we
get that wi is proportional to 1 over sigma i squared.
What that says is something actually
that's kind of reasonable.
That is that the riskier an asset is,
the larger its sigma squared is, the less weight I
should have in the portfolio.
So we might have typically thought, in capital terms,
of an equal-weighted portfolio as being
equal capital associated with each of the assets.
But, if the assets have different levels of riskiness
and especially if we're not considering return,
then we might want to think about things
from a risk perspective.
And, instead of allocating equal capital,
we might want to allocate equal risk.
That is the risk is a measure of how much we might gain or lose.
So putting equal amounts of capital on a very risky
and a very low-risk asset are quite different activities.
Under this solution for the global minimum-variance
portfolio, under the special case where the assets are
uncorrelated, qualitatively, what this solution is telling
us is adjust your exposures to equalize
the risk exposure, rather than the capital exposure,
in the different assets.
Let's take a look at one numerical example.

So here's a numerical example of the minimum-variance solution.
I've taken from CRSP, which is a research
database of historical equity returns, a set of about
700 stocks over a period of many years.
I've estimated the covariance matrix from historical data.
And I've put it in R to compute the quantities
that we wrote down before.
In R, the function solve is to invert a matrix
because it's thinking of solving systems of linear equations.
And matrix operations are sandwiched
between percent signs.
So percent star percent means do matrix multiplication.
And a t of a vector means take its transpose.
So this is just, in R speak, implementing what
we had before in our data set.
And what we find is we get a vector.
We got a 690-component vector whose components sum to 1
that tells us where the minimum-variance solution is.
Notice something interesting.
I've ordered them from smallest to biggest.
690, there's no natural ordering amongst stocks,
but I can order them according to the weights
in this solution.
And what I find is some of them are negative, and some of them
are positive.
So the minimum-variance solution is a long-short portfolio.
The weights add up to 1, but that's a net weight, not
the gross weight.
Some of the weights over here are negative numbers
because I didn't constrain them.
I didn't need to--
I didn't say that they had to be positive values.
So, if you were interested in implementing
this in this case--
and this is not atypical-- you would
have to hold short positions.
What about an upper bound?
Well, I didn't hit anything equal to or greater than 1.
The largest value I have looks like it's about 3 and 1/2%
in any one asset.
I'm not evenly balanced.
I have about 300 stocks short, about 400 stocks long.
But it does satisfy my constraints.
It is the minimum-variance portfolio
for this particular covariance matrix that we have.
And the solution requires, in this case,
that the w's, which were only constrained by the budget,
involve both positive and negative values.
