
PROFESSOR: OK, now, let's include return.
After all, that's what most investors are interested in.
We'd like to take some risk in order to earn some return.
So how much return can we get?
How little risk?
And is there any limit to what's feasible?
What's the best that we could do if we
were willing to look at different classes
of trade-offs?
So what we're going to do is we're
going to find a solution that will tell us
all possible portfolios that we could
get with different combinations of risk and return.
Now, from the foundations of finance
and from maybe common sense, there
are a couple of things that we all
ought to be able to agree on.
And that is that, if we're rational investors,
anyone taking a given level of risk
should prefer more return to less return.
And, for a given level of return,
investors should prefer to have less risk rather than more
risk.
But what we don't have any universal solution to
is trade-offs where we need to take
extra risk to get extra return.
So let's see what we can solve simply in terms of the things
that we know are required.
So let's generalize our Lagrange function that we did from
our minimum-variance case to include--
in addition to our variance that we want to minimize,
our budget that we want to constrain,
let's also have a constraint on the return.
So let's set the portfolio to have a certain required
level of return.
So think of mu p as being a constant that we fix.
I'd like my portfolio to have 6% annualized return
or 10% annualized return.
So the question we're going to ask
is, for a given level of return that we're
demanding, what is the portfolio that
has the least amount of risk?
That's something that we should all agree,
for this constrained problem, would be a good thing.
Of all the portfolios that have the given return,
we should all want to hold the one that
has the least amount of risk.
Now, this isn't the unique formulation of the problem,
but this is the one that's got the easiest mathematics.
So, in the structure of the problem,
we've added one extra term to our previous example.
Because we have two constraints, we
have to Lagrange multipliers, now called l and m.
The structure still is quadratic in the variance.
It's linear in w and the constraints.
And the solution is going to look very similar.
There's just a little bit more algebra to eliminate
two Lagrange multipliers instead of one.

We vary the weights, as we did before,
by taking the partial derivatives with respect
to each of the components or each
of the weights in our portfolio.
So the partial of my Lagrange function
with respect to weight wi is going
to be the sum over j of Cij wj.
This is just the i-th component of the matrix product
sigma times the vector w minus Lagrange multiplier l
times the i-th component of the vector of 1's minus
m times the i-th component of the vector
of expected excess returns.
We solve for the weights in exactly the same way.
We have one term that's linear in w,
two that are w independent.
We move those to the right-hand side.
We multiply both sides of the equation by C inverse
because we know that C inverse--
that C is invertible.
And we have our solution that here
is w in terms of C inverse times,
instead of just one thing, two different things.
Now, we'd be done, but we still have these unknown Lagrange
multipliers.
So that's a little annoying.
We don't quite-- we're not quite done yet.
We need to solve for the Lagrange multipliers,
eliminate them, and then see what we can find in terms of w.
And then, finally, we will substitute back in
and see what the variance of the portfolio
is that we can get for the minimum-variance portfolio
as a function now of our selected constrained return, mu
sub p.
So we eliminate the Lagrange multipliers,
as we did before, by solving the constraints.
So the sum of the weights is equal to 1.
If I take i transpose and I multiply it times the equation
above--
hold on one second.
We've got a small problem with our notation.
The omegas here should be C's.
I will update this in the handouts later on.
I was changing my own notation.
So we'll use C for covariance.
These should be C's.

And we're just solving for the constraints.
So the point is I have l here and here.
I have m here and here.
And we want to solve for l and m.
These things in parentheses that we have here,
these are just constants.
So they look like complicated matrix expressions,
but they're just numbers.
So I can write this as a little matrix problem where
I can say that I've got some linear combination of l and m
times a matrix with those coefficients I've highlighted
is equal to some constants 1 and mu p.
And then, to solve for l and m, I'm
just going to invert the problem.
So, to be clear, I construct a matrix M that's a 2
by 2 matrix of this form, a, b, b,
c, where a and b are these things now with C's properly
and not omegas.
And I can solve that by taking an inverse, which
is easy to do.
The inverse of this symmetric matrix, of a 2 by 2 matrix,
is easy to take.
And then we can eliminate the Lagrange multipliers
and obtain, finally, the variance
as a function of the return.
So, when we do that, there are two things we've achieved.
One of them is we have an expression for our w's.
And the other is now we have a relationship between sigma,
or sigma squared, but between sigma and mu sub
p between risk and return.
So the result is that we get the minimum-variance portfolio
for a given level of return.
And this is actually a hyperbola in space.
So we can write this out in terms of sigma squared
and some bunch of constants.
These are the things that were in that matrix M
that I wrote down before.
But it's sigma squared depends on mu p squared minus something
times mu p plus a constant.
When I plot this in terms of mu and sigma,
I get a hyperbola that's known as the efficient frontier.
And, asymptotically, we can check that this becomes linear,
that these become proportional, because, as mu p goes
to infinity, it dominates the last two terms.
And I'm left with sigma p squared
is proportional to mu p.

In pictures, we get a hyperbola.
And it's conventional to draw things this way,
for historical reasons, where we draw
the standard deviation on the x-axis,
and we draw the return on the y-axis.
So the lines that I've shown in this example,
these are numerical examples from the previous data set,
but taken over two different time periods.
So the red and the blue lines just correspond
to different input data sets.
What we see in both cases is this shape, this hyperbola.
And the idea is that every point along the hyperbola
is a solution to our equation for a given level of return.
So, if I were looking for a return
at this level in these units, I would move across.
And I would say that anything to the left of this point
is not feasible.
Anything to the right is, but it's not desirable.
So all of the points over here are
portfolios that have the same return, but higher risk.
Of all the portfolios of this level of return, as I move,
I can go lower and lower and lower, but then this is it.
I can't get lower than this.
And, similarly, pick a different level of return,
and all of these are higher until I get across here.
And that's the minimum-variance portfolio
for a given level of return.
Now, if we think about this in the other direction,
if we think about transposing it,
if we say, for a given level of risk,
what portfolio would I want, well, I'd
want the portfolio with the highest level of return.
I'm also on the interior region of this curve.
So I would say, these portfolios of this level of risk,
I would want the highest return.
And that would be up here.
Now, you notice that these curves, being hyperbolas,
do turn around.
And these are not functions, strictly speaking,
because there are two values on the curve for values
of a given level of risk.
There are two levels of return.
But the negative ones, the lower part,
is financially uninteresting.
We don't consider it a solution to the problem.
For a given level of risk, we know
that everyone is going to pick the upper value rather
than the lower one.
So, typically, we're going to discard everything down here
for the lower portion.
And the part that matters is this interior region
inside the curve.
Now, the problem we've solved is a single-period optimization
problem.
We've assumed that everything is stationary.
We've assumed that our covariance matrix, which we've
estimated from historical returns, is both accurate
and unchanging over time.
If those things aren't true, then the results change.
So, over a 10-year period, you might not be surprised
that, in a different 10-year period,
the realized covariance is going to be different.
And, perhaps, the past decade of realized covariance
might not be the best predictor for the next 10 years
of realized covariance, but it is a common starting point
to do.
But, clearly, for our optimization problem,
we've taken as one of the inputs a view as
to what the future covariance matrix should be.
If we change that input, we're going to change the output.
The efficient frontier is going to move.
Similarly, for our estimates of expected return,
if we change them, if they're historical estimates
and we either need to update them because of changing market
conditions or, simply, we believe market conditions are
the same, but we've taken a different data set
to estimate them, if the inputs change,
the outputs will change.
One of the challenges for applications in the real world
is that these changes typically are not negligible.
They're often very, very big.
And, furthermore, the results can
be extremely sensitive to very small changes
in some of the inputs.
So it does raise questions about the stability of the result,
as well as relying on important and difficult
statistical challenges like how to best estimate
the parameters.
Algebraically, though, we do have a clear notion
that's worth keeping in mind, despite
the practical difficulties.
There is a feasible set.
And there is-- even if we can't accurately find it,
there is something that's the best portfolio, that
has the best return for a given risk.
And, furthermore, we can map out where it is and divide the risk
return space into those portfolios that are achievable
and those that aren't.
Remember that we started from a very high-dimensional vector
space of possible portfolios where we've got
one component for every asset.
And we're plotting all of those high-dimensional portfolios
on a single two-dimensional plot.
That picture isn't easily invertible,
at least not in your head.
That is two neighboring points, two points that
appear to be close on this plot, might be very, very different
portfolios.
We don't know that.
So we might ask, how do we move toward the efficient frontier?
Are we close even if we're not exactly on it?
Those would be good things to know.
One thing that is interesting, though,
the immediate consequence of our solution,
is that everything that's strictly
on the portfolio-- on the efficient frontier
has a very simple algebraic description.
We wrote down that, before we eliminated our Lagrange
multipliers, that w was C inverse acting
on a linear combination of two vectors,
the iota vector of 1's and the vector of excess returns.
And what that means is that these, C inverse on iota
and C inverse acting on mu, are two very special portfolios.
It says that every portfolio on the efficient frontier,
every portfolio that has an optimal trade-off of risk
and return, is a linear combination
of two special portfolios called characteristic portfolios that
are given with weights that are given by the Lagrange
multipliers.
And there's financial interpretation
of those two portfolios.
C inverse acting on iota, as we've seen,
is the global minimum-variance portfolio.
It's the portfolio we would get if we minimized risk
without regard to return.
The second portfolio, the one with respect to mu,
is the portfolio of the maximum Sharpe ratio.
And, by taking linear combinations of those two,
we sweep out that entire curve.
