PROFESSOR: The term exotic is an umbrella term
that can refer to any nonstandard option.
The possibilities are limitless.
Many exotics are simply constructed
by tweaking ordinary put and call options
to better meet a risk management objective
or to achieve a goal at a lower cost
than with using standard options.
Other exotics are much more complex.
Whereas many standard options are traded on exchanges,
exotic options typically are created and sold
by investment banks and professional money managers.
These writers have exotic options earn a commission
and they typically hedge their risk exposure, often
using the Delta or Delta Gamma Hedging Methods
that we studied earlier.
The goal here is not for you to memorize or derive
a large number of pricing formulas.
For those exotic options for which formulas exist,
that information can be easily found in books or on the web.
What I want to focus on instead as we
go through these examples is first,
what's the rationale for the use of a particular exotic option?
Second, can the exotic option be approximated by a portfolio
of ordinary options?
That sort of comparison is useful,
both for understanding what the option is intended to achieve,
and also how to price it.
In particular, those links can sometimes
show us how to modify the Black-Scholes-Merton equations
to price an exotic.
Third, is the exotic option cheap or expensive
relative to a standard option that achieves a similar goal?
That information is helpful in deciding
whether the difference in protection
offered by the exotic is worth the price difference.
And fourth, what are the general approaches for pricing them
when there isn't a formula available?
In answering that question, you'll
acquire a new and valuable skill,
which is to know the basics about how to price options
using Monte Carlo simulations.
The first stop on our tour of exotics is Bermuda.
Bermudian options falls somewhere
between American and European options
because that can be exercised on certain pre-specified dates
prior to expiration.
Now, if you look at Bermuda on a map,
you'll see it's in the Atlantic between America and Europe,
and that's how these options got their name.
As with any option, where there's
a choice to be made about when it should be exercised prior
to expiration, Bermudan options are often
valued by working backwards on a binomial tree.
That allows an analyst to simultaneously infer
the optimal exercise strategy and the value of the option
at each node using risk neutral pricing
or the equivalent replicating portfolio approach.
Bermudan options can be exotic in other dimensions
as well, such as having strike prices the change
over the life of the option.
An example is employee stock options,
which are sometimes reset to lower the strike price
when they fall far out of the money.
Callable corporate bonds often have an embedded Bermudan
option with a variable strike price.
Those bonds are callable after a call waiting period, which
gives investors some number of years of complete protection
against the bonds being called.
For example, a 10 year bond may have a 3 year call waiting
period, after which the bonds can be called at any time.
On top of that, there may be a declining call
price, which offers additional protection to bondholders.
Continuing the example, those same bonds
might be callable at 120% of par after 3 years, 110% of par
after 4 years, and then at 100% of par thereafter.
Corporate warrants, which are options
issued by a company on its own stock,
are often structured as Bermudan style securities.

Binary options come in two distinct types, cash or nothing
options and asset or nothing options.

A cash or nothing call option has a unit payoff
if the stock price exceeds the strike price, K at expiration,
and a 0 pay off otherwise.
Similarly, the cash or nothing put option
has a unit payoff if the stock price is less
than the strike price at expiration and a 0
pay off otherwise.

Before looking at the pricing formulas,
I want to introduce the second type of binary option, an asset
or nothing option.
An asset or nothing call pays off the stock price
at expiration as sub capital T if that price exceeds
the strike price, K. An asset or nothing put
pays off the stock price at expiration,
ST, if that price is less than the strike price, K.
To understand the pricing formula,
it's useful to observe that a normal call option can
be described as a portfolio that's long
at asset or nothing call option, and short K cash or nothing
call options.
Similarly, a normal put option is a portfolio
that's long take cash or nothing put options
and short in asset or nothing put option.
That observation can be used to interpret the pricing formulas.
Note that the D1 and D2 in these equations
are defined in the same way as in
the Black-Scholes-Merton model with a constant dividend yield
delta.
For the asset or nothing call, the price
is identical to the first term in
the Black-Scholes-Merton written formula for the value of a call
option.

Recall that this formula can be interpreted
as the present value of the expected stock
price conditional on the option expiring in the money
and that's the same thing as the value of an asset or nothing
call.
Now looking at the cash or nothing call, its price given
here, when multiplied by K, is the negative
of the second term in the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
for the value of a call option.
We also saw earlier that this expression
can be interpreted as the present value of the strike
price multiplied by the probability and of D2
of the option expiring in the money.
Hence, the present value of a unit payoff
is the discount factor multiplied
by the probability of the option being in the money.

The same logic holds for binary put options.

We can see then, that binary stock options are
a good example of exotic options that
can be valued by using components
of the Black-Scholes-Merton model
in recognizing their relation to standard options.
