
PROFESSOR: The payoff on an Asian option
is based on an average price over some period of time.
That makes them fundamentally different from the options
we've studied so far, because instead of depending
on the value of an underlying asset at a point in time,
the payoffs are path dependent.
Asian options can be useful for a variety of reasons.
For instance, they can provide an effective and less expensive
hedge than a traditional option when a firm's profit depends
only on the average price of a factor of production,
like electricity or exchange rates over some time period.
It also makes sense to base option payoffs
on an average reference price in situations
where the price at a particular point in time
may be unreliable.
That could happen because the price could
be subject to short-term manipulation,
or it could be prone to big swings
in thin or illiquid markets.
An example of a popular Asian option
is embedded in convertible bonds that
can be exchanged for some number of shares
of the stock of a company at the bond's maturity.
There, the conversion factor is often
based on the average of the stock
price over a period, for instance, 20 days,
at the end of the bond's life.
I mentioned that an Asian option can
be less expensive than an otherwise
similar standard option.
Why is that?
It's because the average price is much less volatile
than the underlying price.
Lower volatility translates to lower option value for both
puts and calls.

Asian options come in many varieties.
One choice is whether to use a geometric or arithmetic
average.
Remember that an arithmetic average of a random variable
is found by adding together the outcomes of N draws
and then dividing by N. The geometric average
is found by taking the product of those N draws
and taking them to the 1 over N-th power.
One can prove that the arithmetic average is
greater than or equal to the geometric average,
and the difference between them increases with the volatility
of the random variable.
With Asian options, the averaging
can be applied to the asset price that
determines the payoff relative to a fixed strike price K,
or the averaging can be applied to the strike price
that the current value of the asset
is compared to at a potential exercise date.
This table summarizes the calculation of the payoffs
depending on whether the option is a put or a call,
whether the averaging is geometric or arithmetic,
and whether the averaging applies to the strike
or to the asset price.
Clearly, each of those choices will have an effect
on the value of the option.

Note, also, that the payoffs in this table
assume the options are European, but they could also
be American.
And that choice, too, often will affect their value.

In this example, we return to a common challenge for exporters,
which is to figure out how to best manage the risk arising
from revenues being in a different currency
than production costs.
Let's assume that a US firm called
XYZ has exports that generate a certain monthly revenue of 100
million euros.
Those revenues are converted to dollars
and repatriated at the end of each month.
XYZ's operating costs are entirely in US dollars.
Uncertainty about future exchange rates
leaves it exposed to a weakening euro that
could cause revenues in dollar terms to fall below its costs.

We'll call the spot price of a euro
in dollar terms x, where x is a random variable.
Then in dollar terms, the value of revenues
at the end of the year is also a random variable,
and it's given by this equation here, based on the 100 million
per month times whatever the exchange rate turns out to be
and a future value factor.
Ignoring the usual small effect of the future value factors
over the horizon of just a year, the amount
of euro exposure that XYZ wants to hedge
can be described as 12 months of protection
against its average exchange rate risk
exposure over the year.
An arithmetic average price option
is a natural choice for a hedge that
protects against the average value of the euro over the year
weakening below some floor exchange rate K. Specifically,
the firm can use an average price put option on the euro
with a payoff equal to the maximum of 0
and K minus the average exchange rate received over the 12
months.
Of course, an average price put option isn't the only way
the exporter could hedge.
It's worthwhile to compare the average price put
option with some of the leading alternatives
and to think about the relative costs and benefits.
One possibility would simply be to buy 12 put
options on the euro that all expire at the end of the year.
A second possibility would be to use a basket of 12 monthly put
options, each with the same strike price
but with expiration dates of one month, two months,
and so on out to 12 months.
A final alternative would be to use a currency
swap that exchanges euros for dollars.
To make these comparisons more concrete,
let's assume that the current exchange rate is $0.9 per euro,
that the strike price in all cases where there's an option
is at the money at 0.9, that the dollar risk-free rate is 6%
and the euro risk-free rate is 3%,
and finally that the volatility of the dollar-for-euro exchange
rate is 10%.
The results of plugging these assumptions
into the various pricing formulas is shown here.
The most expensive choice is the portfolio
of 12 put options, each with a one-year expiration.
That makes sense because it gives the firm a lot
of upside from the 12 options.
The basket of 12 options with consecutive monthly expiration
dates is less expensive because the options
have a positive theta, meaning that longer-maturity currency
options are worth more than those with a shorter maturity.
Turning to the two Asian option alternatives, one arithmetic
and one geometric, both are significantly less expensive
than the basket of 12 European puts.
Here, we're seeing the effect of the averaging reducing
the volatility of the price that determines the payoff, implying
less upside for the firm but also a lower cost of hedging.
The geometric put is slightly more expensive
than the arithmetic put because the geometric average is lower
than the arithmetic average.
Finally, what about a currency swap?
Remember that a new currency swap has a zero upfront
cost because it's priced to have an equal value
for both counterparties.
It also leaves the firm with no upside.
The swap is actually the only one
of these alternatives that's a pure hedge in that it
eliminates risk completely.
Any of the options-based choices protects against the downside
risk, but it also has a speculative element
because it's a bet that the euro will
depreciate against the dollar.
I bet that some of you are wondering
about how you'd estimate the values of these various options
on your own.
You've learned the formula for pricing
standard European currency options,
and you can use it to confirm the values for the 12
one-year options and also for the basket of options
that are reported here.
Closed form approximation formulas
for geometric Asian options can be found in textbooks
based on Black's model.
You're not responsible, though, for knowing that fairly
complicated formula.
For arithmetic average options, pricing
is typically done using a binomial tree or Monte Carlo
simulation.
We'll go over how to price Asian options with these techniques
later today.
