PROFESSOR: Just as their name suggests,
barrier options have features that
depend on the underlying asset hitting a barrier value
specified in the contract.
Barrier put and call options fall
into three broad categories.
First, there's knock-out options that
go out of existence if the underlying
price hits a specified barrier.
A down-and-out option is canceled when the price falls
below a specified barrier.
And an up-and-out option is canceled if the price
rises above the barrier.
Second, knock-in options are activated when
a specified barrier is hit.
A down-and-in knock-in in option is
activated when the underlying price falls below the barrier.
And up-and-in option is activated when the underlying
price rises above the barrier.
The third category, rebate options,
make a fixed payment when a barrier
is hit from above, a down rebate,
or hit from below, an up rebate.
We can ask how did the values of these options
compare to the corresponding options without the barriers.
Well, clearly these options are worth less
because there are times when they're
inoperative when a non-barrier option would
have a positive payoff.
As such, they offer a way to buy more limited protection focused
on situations where the protection is
most highly valued.
These can be thought of as alternatives to buying out
of the money traditional options.
This graph shows an example of how a down-and-in option works.
The strike price in this case is set above the barrier.

Also, the stock price, at the time the option is written,
is above both the strike price and the barrier.

The option doesn't become active until the stock price
hits the barrier from above.
Along this particular path, that happens
when it gets here, which is at about six months.
The payoff on this path will depend
on the asset price and the strike price
at the expiration date.

These barrier options must satisfy the parity conditions
that are shown here.
The relationships are intuitive and pretty easy to establish.
For example, consider a portfolio
consisting of an up-and-in call and an up-and-out call,
both on the same underlying stock with the same strike
price, the same barrier, and the same expiration date.
As long as the underlying stock price stays below the barrier,
then the up-and-out call is operative
and the up-and-in call is inoperative.
If it hits the barrier from below, things switch.
The up-and-in option becomes operative
and the up-and-out call option becomes inoperative,
thus just one of the options is always in effect
and the barrier doesn't really matter.
The outcome is the same as with a standard call.
As with other parity relationships,
the formulas can be useful when you have a pricing
formula for two of the options involved
and want to infer the value of the third option.
Now pricing these options typically
involves a binomial tree or Monte Carlo simulation.
And we'll get to those soon.
But the example here shows the value
of a variety of barrier currency put options.
You can think of it as a continuation
of the previous example we were looking
at where the strike prices represent
the dollar value of one euro.
If you look at the outcomes closely,
you can verify that the prices shown
satisfy the parity relations.
You should also be able to convince yourself
that the qualitative pattern of prices relative to the two
different option types, the different strikes,
and the different barrier values all make sense.

Lookback options have payoffs or strike prices
that give the holder the benefit of perfect hindsight.
That's because they depend on the most favorable outcome
for the option holder over the life of the option.
Lookback options can take a variety of forms.
A floating lookback call has a payoff
at maturity based on the difference
between the underlying price at maturity
and the minimum price of the underlying
over the life of the option.
A floating lookback put, similarly,
has a payoff equal to the maximum price of the underlying
over the life of the option minus the value
of the underlying at expiration.
Therefore, in both cases, it's the strike price
that's floating.
With a fixed lookback call, the strike price K is fixed
but the payoff, if it's positive,
will be based on the maximum price of the underlying
over the life of the option.
And with a fixed lookback put, again the strike price
is fixed at K, but the payoff, if it's positive,
depends on the minimum realized price
over the life of the option.
Not surprisingly, these options are
relatively expensive because the payoffs are higher than
on otherwise similar options.
Analytical formulas are available to value them.
And those assume a lognormal process for the underlying.
They're also based on the statistical distributions
of the maximum and minimum.
It's also straightforward to value these options
numerically.
Another type of exotic options, shout options,
are closely related to lookback options.
Let me tell you a little bit about them.
With a shout option, the holder has one opportunity
to shout when the price reaches a level that will determine
a floor payoff for the option.
For example, imagine a shout call option
that has a strike price of $25.
And also imagine that the holder of the call shouts
when the price of the underlying asset hits $30.
Well, if the final asset price at expiration is less than $30,
the holder receives the payoff of the $30
that they shouted minus the $25 strike
price, so a payoff of $5.
If the stock price at expiration is greater than 30,
the holder receives the excess of the asset
price over the $25 strike price as they
would on a regular call.
A shout option is a bit cheaper than a lookback option
because the shout, even under an optimal shouting strategy,
may turn out to be less advantageous than the payoff
you'd get with perfect foresight.

A very popular type of exotic option contract
is an exchange option.
An exchange option has a payoff which
depends on the amount by which the price of one asset,
which we'll call S, exceeds the price of a second asset we'll
call capital N. It's a way to make a bet on relative price
movements without exposure to changes in prices that are
common across both securities.
For example, you might want to bet the stock price of Tesla
will fall relative to that of Toyota
but without having to take a stand on whether the price
of auto manufacturers is likely to rise or fall
over the life of the option.
When both assets are assumed to be lognormally distributed
and when the option is European, the valuation formula
Bears some similarity to the Black-Scholes-Merton model
with a second asset N in place of the strike price
on a standard call option.
The formula is given here.

As one would expect, the solution
depends on the variance of both assets
and the correlation rho between them.
The higher that correlation, the less valuable
the option will be because the chance
that the two prices will diverge becomes smaller.
And as usual, the value depends on the dividend yields,
which have to be taken into account because they
affect the relative drift in the two asset prices.