PROFESSOR: The examples we've looked at
so far have restricted the Monte Carlo simulation paths
to be the same as the possible paths through a binomial tree.
However, there's no theoretical reason
to limit Monte Carlo simulations to reproduce
the outcomes on a tree.
The main requirement for prices obtained by Monte Carlo
simulations to be theoretically valid
is that you need to make sure that the model satisfies
the conditions for risk neutral pricing.
Restricting Monte Carlo outcomes to mirror the outcomes
on a tree is one way to ensure that dynamic replication
or risk neutral pricing is being achieved.
However, once we decide we can use
risk neutral pricing with a model,
we can simulate out any distribution.
For example, with Monte Carlo, we
can use the lognormal model for stock prices
directly, which is consistent with the Black-Scholes
written assumptions.
As we'll see next, we can also use Monte Carlo
for more complex situations where
there are multiple sources of uncertainty.
That need arises in many instances, including
for valuing exchange options and for incorporating
stochastic volatility in models such as the Heston model.

This slide provides a recipe for computing paths
of stock prices using Monte Carlo simulation
when stock prices are assumed to be log-normally distributed.
The time step is denoted by h.
And starting from a stock price at time t,
S sub t, on a given path, the stock price at time t plus h
is given by this formula.
The stock price on the next step here
is the current stock price multiplied by a constant drift
term plus a shock term based on a draw, epsilon,
from a standard normal density.
This is the drift, and this is the stochastic term
based on epsilon.
This method uses a risk neutral pricing approach.
And the rate r in the drift term denotes the risk-free rate.
Sigma is set to match the actual estimated
volatility of the underlying stock estimated either
using historical data or implied volatilities.
Now, sigma enters this equation in two places.
One is that it shows up as a correction
to the drift in the term minus sigma squared over 2.
And that's something that's a technical correction
that you can read about in the whole textbook.
The volatility is also incorporated through the term
sigma times root h times epsilon, where again, h
is the size of the time step and epsilon
is a draw from a standard normal density.

In Excel, you can draw a standard normal shock using two
built-in functions--
NORMINV combined with RAND.
And the expression here, NORMINV of RAND comma 0 comma
1, where 0 sets the mean to 0 and 1
sets the standard deviation to 1.
Well, it can be proven mathematically
that the expected gross rate of return
on the stock in this risk neutral representation,
the expectation of S sub t plus h over S sub t,
will, in fact, equal e to the risk-free rate times h
as the number of simulations gets large.
It's also true that as the number of Monte Carlo runs
becomes large, the variance of the log of S sub t
plus h over S sub t, which is the same thing as the variance
of the return over an interval h,
converges to sigma squared h.
And so the variance of returns on an annualized basis
converges to sigma squared, which is what we want.

To illustrate what this looks like in practice,
this graph shows the results of a few Monte Carlo
simulations of 10-step paths.
The outcomes are generated using the formula and procedure
described on the previous slide.
Monte Carlo is particularly useful
when valuing a derivative that involves two
or more stochastic processes.
For example, this becomes important to value options that
involve the relative prices or returns
on two different stocks.
Consider an option that pays the maximum between the return
on Google and Apple stock over a time period cap T.
The payoff can be written as shown here.
To value the security, we need to model the distribution
of the possible outcomes and discount the expected value
back to time 0.
We can do this using the risk neutral processes
for each of the two stocks, which we'll call S and N,
as we did before in the discussion of exchange options.
Now, each Monte Carlo run involves simulating out
the stock price path for S and N using the formula
for the evolution of the lognormal stock price.

Notice that the evolution of both
is driven by draws from the standard normal density
function, here denoted by epsilon 1 for S
and by epsilon 2 for N.
In this example, treating the returns
on the two stocks as uncorrelated
would be unrealistic.
Google and Apple are both tech stocks,
and their returns tend to have a positive correlation.
Fortunately, there's an easy way to build
in correlation numerically between epsilon 1
and epsilon 2.
That's to use this formula here.

We choose epsilon 2 at each time step t
by setting epsilon to a t equal to rho,
the correlation between the two stocks,
times epsilon 1 at time t plus the square root of 1 minus rho
squared times epsilon hat at t, where epsilon hat is
another independent draw from the standard normal density
function.

One can prove that epsilon 2 will
have a mean of 0, a variance of 1,
and the desired correlation rho, with epsilon 1 at each time.
I've found this formula extremely useful in valuations
I've done for various projects that involve
complex contingent claims.
I recommend that you commit to memory
that this formula is available for you
to use if you plan to work with derivatives.

To give you an idea of the estimated magnitudes
for exotic options involved in the comparison of returns
on two different stocks, here's a numerical example.
We'll assume that the annualized volatility for both
of these stocks is 0.3, that the risk-free rate is 2%,
and that the correlation between their returns is 0.7.
A Monte Carlo simulation analysis
implies that the option is worth about 1.134.
The second example is to consider the type of exchange
option that I described earlier, where the payoff depends on
whether or not the return on one stock, S, for instance, Google,
is higher than the return on a second stock, N,
which could be Apple.
The same Monte Carlo simulation implies
that the value of this option is much lower at 0.1.
That's consistent with what you should expect.
A payoff that is positively related
to the maximum of the two random variables
is worth more than one that will depend
on the difference between them when they have
a large positive correlation.
A final example is implementing the Heston model in order
to use it to price options.
In the last class, this model was
introduced as a way of better incorporating the fact
that, first, stock price volatility varies
stochastically over time.
And second, that implied volatility is found in the data
to be systematically higher for options with low moneyness
leading to a volatility smirk or smile.
The equations here give the time paths using the Heston model
for a stock price and for the volatility process that
determines the variance.
Recall that to get a smile or smirk,
it's necessary to assume a negative correlation
between the shocks driving the stock price and the shocks
driving the volatility process that, in turn, enters
into the price process.
The graphs here show one sample path
that comes out of a Monte Carlo simulation model for the stock
price and also for the corresponding volatility
process.
Volatility tends to be higher when the stock price is lower,
but the two series are not perfectly correlated.
We've come to the end of this introduction
to exotic options and the approaches that
are used to value them.
We've seen that to understand a new exotic option that you
might encounter, the key questions you should start with
include, what purpose or purposes does it serve?
Can its payoffs be approximated or replicated
by a portfolio of ordinary options?
And what intuitively should be the key determinants
of its value?

We focused on the three main approaches
for valuing exotic options using an analytic formula, often
a variant of the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
when that's available, binomial trees, and Monte
Carlo simulation.
I emphasized the binomial trees are particularly important when
an option has an element of being American-style
and a decision has to be made about the optimal time
to exercise it.
Working backwards on a tree that has ordered outcomes
makes it possible to solve for value and the optimal strategy
simultaneously.
We also saw that risk neutral Monte Carlo simulation
is a popular and versatile tool for pricing
complex derivative securities.
The basic process with Monte Carlo
always involves three steps.
First, simulate many risk neutral paths
for the value of the underlying asset.
Second, for each path, compute the discounted simulated payoff
on the derivative of a security.
And third, estimate the derivative price
as the average of discounted payoffs
across all of the paths.

We saw that there are many derivatives that
can be valued equally well with the binomial approach
or with Monte Carlo simulations.
In such cases, there are usually computational pros and cons
to each alternative that will determine the best method.
I emphasized that Monte Carlo simulation
can be especially useful for valuing
path-dependent securities, like Barrier options, Asian options,
and Lookback options.
For these types of options, it's possible, but more complicated,
to value them using a binomial tree.
We also saw that Monte Carlo is the logical choice for payoffs
that rely on more than one stochastic factor,
such as the maximum of two stock returns
or the differences between them.
Finally, Monte Carlo is often the best way
to incorporate more general stochastic asset
processes, such as those with stochastic volatility,
stochastic interest rates, or jumps.
There's certainly a lot to think about here.
And the recitation and homework problems
should be helpful in cementing the concepts
and providing practice using them.
Truly mastering this material will put you
in a strong position to be able to understand and estimate
the value of just about any sort of exotic derivatives
that you might encounter in the future.
