PROFESSOR: Compound options are options that
are written on other options.
Those would include a call on a call, a put on a call,
a call on a put, and a put on a put.
Or the chain could have even more steps--
a call on a call on a call, for example.
These compound options typically must
be priced by backward induction on a binomial tree.
Compound options are actually more common
than you might first imagine because they arise
in many situations and, particularly, in the context
of real investment options.
For example, think about an investment in higher education.
In a two-year college program, you
might have an option in the first year
to enroll with a payment of $10,000.
And then, in year 2, you have the option
to complete the second year for an additional tuition
payment of another $10,000.
The option to continue in year 2 is like a regular call option
with a strike price of $10,000, which you would exercise when
the present value of the degree at that point
exceeds the $10,000.
The option to enter into the two-year program
in the first place is what makes it a compound option.

Another type of exotic is a gap option.
A gap call option has a payoff based
on the difference between the underlying asset price
and a fixed strike price, K1.
But the payoff is only realized when the asset price
is greater than a barrier, K2.
The formula for a gap option is given here.
When the underlying assets satisfy
the usual Black-Scholes-Merton assumptions.
Notice that K1 is like K in the standard Black-Scholes-Merton
formula, but that the probabilities N of d1 and N
of d2 depend on the probability of being over the barrier,
rather than over the strike price.

This is a payoff diagram for a gap call
option with a strike, K1, of 90 and a barrier, K2, of 100.
To answer the question on the slide
of whether the option costs more or less than a similar option
without the gap, we can draw the path diagram on a call option
with a strike price of 90 and no barrier.

We can see that the difference in payoffs between the two
is this triangular region.
In this region, our regular call option
has a higher payoff than the gap option.
Therefore, the gap option is worth
less than the traditional call option.

The final stop on this whirlwind tour of exotic options
is one of my favorites.
A quanto is an exotic option that
provides a payoff in one currency that's
directly based on an index value in a second currency.
It allows investors to take a position
in a risky foreign asset without any exchange rate risk.
For example, the Nikkei put warrants traded on the American
Stock Exchange are quantos because the payoffs
and the premiums are in dollars but the payoff is directly
scaled by the yen price of the Nikkei index
relative to a yen strike price.
That allows investors to take a positional bet on the direction
of the Japanese stock market without exposure
to the risk of the dollar-yen exchange rate.
That exchange rate risk couldn't be completely
hedged with a regular forward contract
because there's uncertainty about the size
of the amount that needs to be hedged when the underlying is
a risky stock.
So what's special about quantos is
that they have an embedded currency forward
with a variable notional amount.
It's that variable notional amount
that gives quantos their name.
Quanto is short for quantity adjusting option.
