PROFESSOR: Clearly, for ordinary put and call options,
like the ones we just looked at, there's
no reason to choose Monte Carlo over binomial valuation.
And in fact, the simplest thing to do
is to use an analytical formula, such as
the Black-Scholes-Merton model, when you can.
The utility of a Monte Carlo simulation approach
becomes apparent for exotic derivatives that
have path dependent payoffs.
That is the value of the option at maturity
depends on the path taken by the stock
during the life of the option.
We saw that agent options are path-dependent because they
have a payoff that's based on the average of the stock price
over the life of the option.
It's possible to price these options on a binomial tree.
But doing so involves some complications
that are illustrated by this next example
and that are avoided with Monte Carlo simulation.

This figure shows a 2-step binomial stock price tree
that we can use to price a European-Asian call
option with an at the money strike price of 100.
As usual, the tree will track the stock price over time
on each node based on the up or down moves we've calculated
to calibrate the tree.
But now we also need to keep track
of the average price along every possible path
and the probability of every possible path.
For example, on the up-up path, the average
of 100, and 123, and 152.8 give us an average stock price
of 125.49.
Then the call option is in the money by 25.49 at that node.
Well, the additional complexity arises
with a comparison of the up-down and the down-up situations.
Although the underlying stock price tree is recombining,
reaching a stock price of 100 in both the up-down
and the down-up, the average of the stock prices
is much higher with an up-down than with a down-up,
resulting in a call that's in the money in one case
and out of the money on the other, hence a tree
representing the averages won't be a recombining
tree and the number of terminal nodes
will grow exponentially with the number of steps
rather than linearly.

We can calculate the probability of reaching each of these four
possible outcomes for the value of the call option
at expiration by taking into account the number of up
and down moves along each path.
For instance, any path with one up and one down
will have a risk neutral probability of q star times 1
minus q star, which will equal 24.91%,
given all the assumptions used to compute this example.
The terminal payoffs at each node
are weighted by their respective probabilities,
then discounted at the risk-free rate,
and added together to get an Asian option value of 7.45
implied by the tree.

Well, rather than doing all of this combinatorial calculations
to get the probability of every possible path and its outcome,
it's simpler to just use Monte Carlo simulation.
That will involve simulating a large number of stock price
paths, calculating the average stock
price along each of those paths, and finding
the corresponding discounted option payoff.
The averages across the discounted payoffs
is the estimate of the options value.
Doing this for a simulation with 100 Monte Carlo runs
produces an estimate of 7.56 with a standard error of 0.316,
which is quite close to the value we
found using the tree of 7.45.
I want to take a minute to recap the advantages of Monte Carlo
simulation for valuing path-dependent options
and to illustrate the conclusions graphically.
The top graph here shows the original stock price
paths over 10 Monte Carlo runs.
The lower graph shows the corresponding averages
at each node, which are the relevant asset
values underlying the payoffs on Asian options.
While the original stock price paths
look like the recombining tree that we started with,
the averages look like paths on a non-recombining tree.
Non-recombining trees are much harder
to evaluate numerically for a large number of time steps
because the number of possible outcomes
grows exponentially in the number of times steps.
However, I also want to note that when
a path-dependent derivative is American rather than European,
so that it involves a decision about optimal exercise,
it's more straightforward to go back
to the non-recombining binomial tree
than to try to use Monte Carlo methods.
The reason is that it's quite tricky
to infer the optimal exercise policy with a Monte Carlo.
There are some Monte Carlo approaches
that have been proposed to deal with that added
layer of complexity but those are
beyond the scope of what we're going to look at here.

Finally, a reminder that we looked
at several other types of exotic options
that are path dependent.
Those include barrier options of various flavors, loopback
options, and Asian strike options.
Monte Carlo simulation provides a useful tool for valuation
in each of these cases as well.