
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will define what is variance
and standard deviation of the returned distribution.
We will continue working with our example of Nikola stock.
Let's first define, what is variance?
Variance of return R is the expected squared deviation
from the mean, meaning that it is expected squared deviation,
which is this from the mean.
And we know that this ER is the mean or the expected return.

So you could see that, if the return never
deviates from its mean, the variance will be zero.
Otherwise, the variance will be increasing with the magnitude
of the deviation from the mean.
Therefore, the variance is a measure
of how spread out the distribution of return is,
so let us compute this variance right now for Nikola stock.
But first, let's write down this expression that
is written in expected value terms
as applied to our case of this Greek distribution.
So it's going to be sum of probabilities, PIs, multiplied
by return RI that we'd get in a given state minus the expected
return, and this will be squared.
So this is for all I's from one to N,
however many states we have.
Now, let's continue writing down this expression
and just applying it to our case.
It's going to be P1 multiplied by R1 minus expected
return plus P2 times R2 minus the expected return
plus B3 times R3 minus the expected return,
and we have to square all of these differences.
So that we get the correct expression,
and this is because we have only three states in this example.
Now, recall that returns in individual states were this.
So in this upstate or in the very positive scenario,
the return was 368.75%.
In the second scenario, the return was negative 37.5%.
In the most adverse scenario, the return was negative 93.75%.
The expected return was negative 13.75%.
So now, we can plug-in all of these numbers
into the expression for the variance of the return.
So it's 10% multiplied by 368.75% minus,
and we're subtracting the negative number.
So minus negative 13.75% squared plus 60% multiplied
by negative 37.5% minus--
again, we're subtracting a negative number.
So we would effectively be adding them up,
so 23.75% squared as well plus 30% multiplied
by negative 93.75% minus negative 13.75%
squared as well.
The value of this expression equals to 1.69.
Now, finally, let me compute the standard deviation
of the return on the stock, which
by definition is the squared root of the variance.
And therefore, in our case, it is the squared root
of 1.69, which is 1.3.
Now, standard deviation of returns,
which is often referred to as volatility,
is often expressed in percentages.
So in this case, the standard deviation
of returns on this stock would be 130%.
Let me make one important remark.
Notice that I expressed standard deviation or the volatility
of returns in percentages.
So same units in which we measure
returns and expect that the returns as well.
But I haven't done that for the variance of returns,
and the reason for that is that variance returns is measured
in percentages squared.
And we could see it right here.
Because when we are taking the deviations from the mean,
we are raising them to power of two.
Therefore, when it comes to variance,
we typically just express it as a number and not
as a percentage.