
PROFESSOR: Financial assets include bank deposits,
certificate of deposits, commercial paper,
treasury securities, corporate bonds, stocks,
and derivative securities.
In the segment, we will discuss in detail
each of these financial assets.
Bank deposits are money placed into banks for safekeeping.
They include money deposited in the checking accounts
and savings accounts.
In the United States, these accounts
are partially insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation, or FDIC.
The standard deposit insurance coverage limit is $250,000.
They account holder has the right
to withdraw deposited funds as set forth
in the terms and conditions governing the account
agreement.
Typically, there are no restrictions
on withdrawals from checking and savings accounts.

Certificate of deposit, or a CD, is a financial product
offered by banks that allows a customer to deposit money
for a specific time period.
So these differ from regular savings accounts
in that the CD has a specific fixed term, often one, three,
or six months, or one to five years,
and usually a fixed interest rate.
The bank expects a CD to be held until maturity, at which time
they can be withdrawn and interest is paid.
Because money deposited into CDs are illiquid,
interest rates on CDs are typically significantly higher
than interest rates on liquid accounts,
such as regular savings accounts.

Commercial paper is an unsecured, short-term debt
instrument issued by corporations, typically used
for the financing of payroll, accounts
payable and inventories, and meeting
other short-term liabilities.
Maturities on commercial paper typically last several days
and rarely range longer than 270 days.
The average maturity of commercial paper is 30 days.
Commercial paper is usually a cheaper source
of funds than a short-term bank loan.
The minimum face value is $25,000.
And most commercial paper has a face value
of at least $100,000.
The interest on commercial paper is typically
paid by selling it at initial discount.
Commercial paper is rated by credit agencies,
similar to other types of corporate debt.
In the United States, treasury securities
are government debt instruments issued by the United States
Department of the Treasury to finance government spending.
Treasury securities are often referred
to simply as treasuries.
Treasuries are backed by the full faith and credit
of the United States, meaning that the government promises
to raise money by any legally available means to repay them.
Although the United States is a sovereign power
and may default without recourse,
its strong record of repayment has given treasury securities
a reputation as one of the world's
lowest-risk investments.
There are four types of marketable treasury
securities--
treasury bills, treasury notes, treasury bonds, and treasury
inflation-protected securities, or TIPS.
The government sells the securities
in auctions conducted by the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, after which they can
be traded in secondary markets.

Treasury bills are treasuries with maturities
equal or less than 1 year.
Treasury notes are treasuries with maturities
between 2 and 10 years.
Treasury bonds are long-term bonds with maturities
longer than 10 years.
The current longest maturity is 30 years.
Interestingly, in 2019, Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin
announced an intent to issue a 50-year maturity,
ultra-long bond.
But as of 2020, these plans were canceled.
A corporate bond is a type of debt security
that is issued by a firm and sold to investors.
The company gets the capital it needs.
And in return, the investor is paid a pre-established number
of interest payments at either a fixed or variable interest
rate.
When the bond expires or reaches maturity,
the payments seize and the original investment
is returned.
A stock, also known as equity, is a security
that represents the ownership of a fraction of a corporation.
This entitles the owner of the stock
to a proportion of the corporation's assets
and profits equal to how much stock they own.
Units of stock are called shares.
For example, as of April 23, 2020,
Tesla Motors had 185,371,105 shares outstanding.
Owning one share of Tesla would give you an ownership of 1
divided by 185,371,105 shares, or 0.00000054% of the firm.
Stocks are bought and sold predominantly
on stock exchanges, though they can be private sales as well.
These transactions have to conform
to government regulations, which are meant to protect investors
from fraudulent practices.
Corporate stocks form one of the major asset classes.
Today, many people own stocks either directly as part
of their investment portfolios or indirectly
through managed retirement plans.
A financial derivative is a security
whose value is derived from an underlying asset
or group of assets.
The derivative itself is a contract
between two or more parties.
A well-known example of a derivative
is a financial option.
An option gives you a right to buy or sell
an underlying asset--
for example, a stock--
according to agreed-upon terms.
These terms include the time when the transaction happens
as well as the price at which the assets can
be bought or sold.
The price of a derivative security
depends on fluctuations in the value of the underlying assets.
Common derivative securities include forwards, futures,
and interest rate swaps.
Derivatives are commonly used to manage risks and hedge
against events that can adversely affect values
of owned assets as well as to speculate and make
bets on certain outcomes in the financial and other markets.