
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we will
talk about major types of financial institutions.
The list includes commercial banks, savings and loans
associations, investment banks, insurance companies,
and investment funds.
A commercial bank provides services,
such as accepting deposits, making personal and business
loans, including credit cards and offering basic investment
products, such as savings accounts and certificates
of deposit.
Examples include well-known names,
such as Bank of America in the United States,
Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, or ICBC,
and Crédit Agricole in France.
A savings and loan association, or S&L,
is a financial institution that specializes
in accepting savings deposits and making
mortgage and other loans.
The key difference between S&L and commercial bank
is that S&L traditionally placed a stronger emphasis
on the residential mortgage loans,
while many large commercial banks concentrate
on working with large businesses by providing loans.
In addition to providing residential mortgages,
commercial banks also engage in mortgage loans targeting
the construction and expansion needs of regional, national,
and international businesses.
S&L's used to play a very important role
in the residential mortgage market in the United States.
In the mid 1970s, their share of mortgages in single family
houses was over 50%.
During 1980s, the number of S&L's in the United States
decreased more than twice.
One of the reasons was an increase in interest rates
together with the fact that portfolios
of deposits and loans had different properties making
S&L's particularly vulnerable to increases in the interest
rates.
This situation is called duration mismatch,
which we'll describe in the second half of this course.
An investment bank is a financial services company
that helps corporations and governments to raise capital
by underwriting or acting as the clients agent
in the issuance of securities.
An investment bank also helps firms involved
in mergers and acquisitions, or M&A's, by advising them
and providing capital needed to facilitate these transactions.
Investment banks also have brokerage and asset management
departments.
Unlike commercial banks, investment banks
do not take deposits.
From the passage of Glass-Steagall Act in 1933
until its repeal in 1999, the United States
maintains a separation between investment banking
and commercial banks.
Other countries have historically not maintained
such a separation.
As part of the Dodd-Frank act of 2010,
the Volcker Rule asserts some separation
of investment banking services from commercial banking.
Today, most large banks have both commercial and investment
banking divisions.
For example, JPMorgan Chase was formed
by a merger of investment bank JP
Morgan with a commercial bank Chase Manhattan.
An insurance company is a financial services company
that sells insurance products, such as life
insurance and property and casualty insurance.
Insurance companies collect insurance premiums
from customers, which include both individuals
and corporations, and pay out claims
following insured events.
An insurance company typically invests its capital that
comes from insurance premiums.
For example, insurance firms are some
of the largest buyers of corporate bonds in the United
States.
Management of assets and liabilities
is at the core of the business model of insurance firms.
Finally, investment funds are investment vehicles
that allow investing alongside other investors
in order to benefit from the advantages of working
and investing as part of a group.
Types of investment funds include mutual funds,
exchange trade funds, hedge funds,
and private equity funds.
Mutual funds and exchange trade funds, or ETFs,
are currently one of the main vehicles for retail investors
to access diversified investment products.
We'll talk more about them later in the class.
A hedge fund is an investment fund
that trades in relatively liquid assets
and is able to make extensive use of more complex trading,
portfolio construction, and risk management
techniques to improve performance,
while limiting risk exposure.
An example of a well-known and very successful hedge fund
is the Medallion Fund of Renaissance Technologies
founded by James Simons.
Finally, private equity funds is an investment fund
that directly invests in private companies,
or they're engaged in buyouts of public companies,
resulting in the listing of public equity.
Over the last 10 years, private equity investing
has been one of the fastest growing industries in finance.