
PROFESSOR: As we have discussed, the central problem
in finance or business decision making in general
is how to value assets or their cash flows.
A cash flow, in addition to its magnitude,
has two key characteristics, as we have discussed before.
Its timing and risk.
We are now going to develop a simple model
to capture the two essential elements in finance, time
and risk.
We assume that the are two dates for the economy-- today
and tomorrow, or now and future.
Denoting time by t, t equals 0 for today and 1 for tomorrow.
Sometimes we also draw a horizontal line
to represent time.
The timeline, as shown at the bottom on the right hand
side of the slide, the two dates are marked as 0 and 1.
For day 0, there is no uncertainty.
Before day 1, there is uncertainty.
We describe this uncertainty by assuming
that there are N possible economic states at day one,
such as boom or recession.
We denote the state by s, and it can be 1, 2, or N,
for state 1, 2, or N.
The likelihood of these states are
given by their probabilities, P1, P2, and PN.
The N states can also be represented by the N branches
at time 1, as in the graph on the right hand
side of the slide.
We assume that the possible states and their probabilities
are known to all decision makers.
The tree graph on the right hand side
of the slide with the associated probabilities,
is also called a state space model for the economy.
Ideally, the state space model fully
captures the risk of the economy.
The simple model described here may seem a bit too simplistic
for that purpose, but it can be extended easily
to allow many dates and many states, even the continuum
states.
We will consider some of these extensions later.
But for now, our main purpose is to have the simplest
model to capture the key elements needed
for our analysis, and to develop the basic ideas, principles,
and methods for asset valuation.
For this purpose, we often even reduce the number of states
to two for simplicity.
We now consider a financial market
with no frictions in this economy,
with a set of financial assets being traded.
Assets can be traded at time 0, and the payoffs
realized at day 1.
Let P denote the price of an asset at times 0,
X denote its payoff at time 1.
The value of X in general depends on the state
of the economy at time 1.
It will be X1 in state 1, X2 in state 2, et cetera.
X can also be represented as a vector of different payoffs
in different states.
It's also called a random variable
denoting unpredictable realizations
at some future time.
A random payoff is fully defined by its payoff
in each possible state and the corresponding probability.
Mathematically, we can write it as a payoff vector,
with each element of the vector denoting the payoff
in that state, X1 to XN.
Together with the corresponding probabilities P1 to PN.
Assets traded in the financial market
can have different payoff patterns.
In general, there are many traded assets or securities.
Here, securities refer to financial claims, contracts
traded in the financial markets, such as stocks, bonds,
and derivative securities.
We first introduce some simple securities.
Consider a primitive state-contingent claim,
which pays $1 in a single state, S, and nothing otherwise.
It is also called an Arrow-Debreu security,
named after the two economists who first introduced them
into financial market modeling.
Although Arrow-Debreu securities are not
the most divisible or common securities seen in a market,
they do exist in mature markets.
Introducing them here is to facilitate our analysis
in the simplest way possible.
As shown later, their actual existence
is not essential as long as we have a rich enough set
of traded securities, like bonds, stocks,
and derivative securities.
We will denote the price of the Arrow-Debreu claim on state j
by phi j.
Phi j is also called the state price for state j.
State price turns out to be a very useful concept
in our valuation analysis, as we will
see throughout this course.
No arbitrage requires that all state prices are positive.
A security that pays off a positive amount at least
in one future state must have a positive price today.
Otherwise, we can construct an arbitrage.
Since there are a total off N states,
there are also N different Arrow-Debreu securities.
A financial market is called complete
if all the Arrow-Debreu securities
are traded in the market.

Complete market is a useful abstraction, as we'll see soon.
It merely means that the financial market is rich enough
in terms of the securities being traded in the market.
As we said in the introduction, there
are indeed tens of thousands of securities being traded
in the global financial market.
For most of the applications we discussed in this course,
assuming a complete financial market is
a reasonable starting point.
More discussion on this point will
occur when we develop more detailed risk and valuation
models.