
PROFESSOR: Using market prices, prices
or expected returns of traded assets,
we can value a particular asset, project,
or cash flow, its current market value or present value.
We now expand on this idea to further
develop some techniques to value a cash flow
or to compute its present value.
We will do so by starting with a couple of examples,
the extensions of the simple examples we considered
in the introduction.
We will start with the simplest case possible.
That is, $1,000 of a safe cash flow in one year.
The question is, how much should that cash flow be worth today?
Let's suppose that in a market similar assets,
namely safe assets, are offering an annual return of 2%.

Think of a potential buyer of this cash flow.
She would also expect a 2% annual return,
same as what other safe assets offer in a market.
Let the price she's willing to pay be P. Then we
have the following equation.
Namely, P, which is the price she is paying,
times 1 plus the 2% return she expects to get.
That should equal to the total cash flow at the year end.
That's $1,000.
We can solve this equation for the price, P,
which would equal to $1,000.
That's the expected cash flow in this case with certainty.
Divide by 1 plus the expected rate of return, 2%.
If we finish that computation, we're getting P to be $980.
This is a rounded number.
So this is really what any investor in a market
would be willing to pay, which is also
what we call the present value or the current market
value of this cash flow.
It's really given by the expected cash
flow from this asset--
in this case, $1,000 for sure--
discounted at the required rate of return of 2%.
So this formula is sometimes also called
the discounted cash flow formula, namely,
the value of a cash flow when an asset is
given by its expected payoff discounted
at appropriate discount rate.
Now of course, we realize this discount rate really reflects
the time value of money.
It adjusts for the fact that $1,000 is occurring-- not now,
but one year from today.
In the second example, we can assume
that this $1,000 in one year, it's no longer certain.
But rather, it's risky.
The question is how much should it be worth today?
Let's again look at the market.
Suppose that traded assets of similar risk
offer an expected annual rate of return of 20%.
Well, given that, we can easily compute the current market
value for this cash flow of $1,000 in one year.
The potential buyer, again, would
expect a 20% return on this by paying the current price--
let's say, P.
So by looking at this equation, P times 1 plus 20%
should equal to $1,000, the expected
payoff from this risky asset.
The present value of this cash flow
then is given by this simple discounted cash flow formula,
namely, $1,000 of expected cash flow discounted
at the 20% rate of return, which is
the market's expected rate of return for assets
with this level risk.
If we finish the calculation, that
gives the present value or the current market price
for this cash flow of $833.
As we noticed, the discount rate here of 20%
is quite a bit higher than the 2% in the previous example,
where the cash flow is certain.
This actual rate of return reflects the risk premium.
So the present value formula really
properly adjusts for risk by choosing
the appropriate discount rate for assets with same risks.

From the two examples, we can generalize the current market
value of a cash flow or its present value
is determined by two factors.
First, its expected payoff.
Second, an appropriate discount rate,
where the discount rate is given by the expected rate of return
on traded assets with similar cash
flows in both timing and risk.
In particular, the present value of a cash flow
is given by its expected cash flow discounted
at an appropriate discount rate, r bar.
Therefore, the value of an asset or cash flow
is determined by the financial market
through the discount rate or expected rate of return,
or required rate of return.
They all mean more or less the same thing.
The discount rate here should properly
adjust for time and risk of the cash flow.
The discount rate is also called the opportunity cost of capital
because it is the return offered by similar assets traded
in the market.