
PROFESSOR: With a complete financial market,
we can develop a general methodology
to value assets using the market prices of traded assets.
We will start with a market in which
a complete set of Arrow-Debreu securities are traded.
With the prices of these Arrow-Debreu securities,
we can price other assets, securities, or cash flows
by using the first principle of finance;
there is no free lunch in the financial market
without frictions.
With the prices of the Arrow-Debreu securities,
we can price other assets and the securities.
To illustrate this idea, let's consider a two-state economy
in which we only have two states for day one.
We have three assets traded in the market.
The first two assets are the two Arrow-Debreu securities,
one paying $1 in state one, $0 in state two,
and the other paying $0 in state one and $1 in state two.
The third asset has a payoff x, paying $3 in state one
in $5 in state two.
The question is how is the price of the third asset
related to the prices of the first two, namely
the two Arrow-Debreu prices, or two-state prices?
In order to answer this question,
we can think of the third asset as a portfolio of the first two
assets, namely the two Arrow-Debreu securities.
In particular, we can think of it
as being a portfolio of three units of the state one
Arrow-Debreu security plus five units of the state
two Arrow-Debreu security.
In this case, the portfolio would pay $3 in state one,
coming from the three units of state one Arrow-Debreu
security, and it will pay $5 in state two
form the five units of state two Arrow-Debreu securities.
The claim is that the price of this asset
x is going to be given by the following equation, namely
its price should equal to three times
the state one state price plus five times
the state two state price.
Since the third asset can be replicated
as a portfolio of the two Arrow-Debreu securities, namely
three units of Arrow-Debreu security one and five units
of Arrow-Debreu security two.
Then by no arbitrage, its price must
equal the price of the replication portfolio, namely
its price P must equal to three times phi 1, plus five times
phi 2.
If this is violated, then agents can generate arbitrage profits
in the market.
How?
Well let's see.
Suppose that actually the price of the third asset, P,
is greater than three times phi 1, plus five times phi 2,
then what we can do is actually to sell the asset three,
gaining P, and then buying three units of Arrow-Debreu security
one, plus five units of Arrow-Debreu security two.
The price difference, in this case would be positive,
will be our current profit, and then the net future cash flow
would just be zero.
So in the absence of arbitrage, we
must have the price of the third asset being
the same as the cost of the replication portfolio.
This example shows a more general idea,
sometimes called the Law of One Price,
which states that if two assets have the same payoffs,
they must have the same market price.
Applying this principle, then we can
price all the other securities using the prices
of Arrow-Debreu securities.
All we have to do is to construct a replication
portfolio for a particular security,
and then compute its price using the cost or the price
of the replication portfolio.
Now of course, this all relies on the assumption
that we have the prices of all the Arrow-Debreu securities.
What if we have prices of a bunch of composite securities?

Let's consider a simple example.
Suppose that we have two economic states at day one.
In a financial market, we have two traded securities,
one is a safe government bond, which pays an interest
rate of 5% with no risk.
The other security is a stock that pays $90 in state one
and $120 in state two, and its current price is $100.
The question is, what should be the proper set of state prices?

Well let's see.
From the price and the pay off of the government bond,
we have the following equation; 100 on the left hand side,
which is current price, equals to 105,
its payoff in state one, times the state price for state one
phi1, then plus 105 it's payoff in state two,
times the state price of state two phi2.

From the pay off in the price of the stock,
we've got the second equation, 100, again it's current price,
equals to 90, which the stocks pay off in state one,
times phi 1, plus 120, the stocks pay off
in stock two times phi 2.
These two equations from the prices
of the stock and the bond allows us determine the two state
prices, phi 1 and phi 2.

If we solve for the two state prices,
we've got the following solution,
phi 1 equals 10/21 and phi 2 equals 10/21 as well.
Here's a special case in which the state prices are identical.
This example shows that actually if we
have, "regular securities" like a stock in the month
from their prices and the payoffs,
we can actually back out the Arrow-Debreu state prices.

Now let's consider another example.
Suppose there are two states next year.
The payoff of a share of a stock and the probabilities
of the states are $90 in state one, $110 in state two,
with the probabilities being 0.4 and 0.6 respectively.
We're also going to assume that the state prices for the two
states are 0.5 for state one, and 0.4 for state two.
We would like to answer the following questions: one,
what is the stock price today?
Two, what is the expected rate of return on the stock?
The stock price today can be computed easily.
P should just equal to phi 1, the state price for state one,
times X1, the stocks pay off in state one, plus phi 2, time X2.
Plug-in the numbers, it gives us 0.5.
The state price for state one times 90,
the stocks payoff in state one, then plus 0.4 times 110.
That gives us 89 as the current price of the stock.

Next, we can compute the expected rate of return
on the stock, which is denote by Rbar.
Rbar should equal to the expected payoff
from the start, minus its price today,
then divide by its price today.
It can also be expressed as the expected payoff of the spot,
divide by its price today, then minus one.
If we plug-in the numbers, that gives us 0.4 times 90,
plus 0.6 times 110.
For the numerator, divide by 89, its price then minus one.
Finishing the computation, we will
get the expected rate of return on the stock
to be 13 divided by 89.

Given the expected rate of return
on the stock by the market, we also
have the following expression; the price of the stock times
one plus the expected rate of return on a stock
should equal to the expected payoff on the stock.
Rewrite this equation, we have the price
of the stock being given by the expected pay off,
divided by one plus the expected rate of return on the stock.
Plug in the numbers, we have 102 for the numerator,
and then 1+ (13/89) for the denominator.
Finishing the calculation, we get 89
as the price of a stock, which is exactly what we got before.
So they are basically two ways to compute the stock price
today.
One is by the state prices, the other
is by the expected payoff, then discounted by the expected
rate of return on the stock.
Both methods give us the same answer.

In general, in a complete market without frictions,
we can value any cash flow by the no-arbitrage principle,
the first principle of finance.

Suppose a firm is considering a project yielding time one cash
flow X, which is X1 in state one,
X2 in state two, et cetera.
Using the prices of Arrow-Debreu securities,
we can then attach a value to this cash flow as follows.

Its value should equal to phi 1, the state price in state one,
times X1, its pay off in state one, plus phi 2,
times X2, and so on.
And that gives the current market
value of the project or the cash flow.
This valuation formula encapsulates
the relative or arbitrage pricing
principle, which we are going to be
using for our future analysis.
PV here is also called the present value of the project
or asset or the cash flow.

As we have seen in the previous example,
the present value, PV, is also given
by the expected payoff of the asset
and then the expected rate of return on the asset.

The key idea here when it comes to value an asset
is to find traded assets with similar cash flows,
both in timing and risk, and then
use their prices for the expected return
to value the particular asset we're interested in.