
PROFESSOR: The present value looks
at the current value of a future cash flow
by discounting back at the appropriate discount rate.
We can also consider the future value of a cash flow
today by allowing it to grow at the proper rate of return.
Suppose that we have $1 today.
What would be its worth in one year
if the interest rate is 4%?
Well, we could certainly invest that $1 in the market,
earning a rate of return of 4%.
In one year, that $1 would turn into $1.04,
where $0.04 will be the interest on the $1 initial investment.
So $1.04 will be the future value
of $1 in one year at the market rate of 4%.

What about its future value in T years?
Well, we will just have to multiply 1 plus the interest
rate T times.
So the future value of $1 in T years
will be 1 plus r raised to the Tth power.

Let's consider a complete example.
Suppose a bank issues a CD with an annual interest of 4%.
And this is a 2-year CD.
Suppose that you deposit $10,000.
What will be your balance in two years?
It would just be $10,000 times 1 plus the interest rate of 4%.
Raise it to the power of 2.
And in that, it will give us $10,816.
And that is the future value of $10,000 today in two years.
Business decisions often involve choices
between different alternatives.
Each alternative may involve a stream of cash flow
with many pieces.
Comparing these cash flows is not trivial
given that they have multiple pieces.
Let's consider the following example.
A drug company has developed a new flu vaccine
and needs to choose between two strategies.
Strategy A is to bring to market in one year, invest $1 billion
now, and returns $500 million in year 1, $400 million year 2,
and $300 million in year 3.
Strategy B involves bringing the vaccine to market in two years,
investing $200 million in year 0 and 1,
and then returns $300 million in year 2 and 3.
How do we make a decision between strategy A and B?
In particular, how do we value, or compare,
these two strategies, or their cash flows?
Of course, the cash flows of the two strategies being
multi-dimensional cannot be easily ranked.
With the present value, however, the ranking becomes simple.
The present value of a cash flow or its current market price
is a number, a scalar, which can be easily compared.
First, we note that the present value of a stream of cash flow
is simply the sum of the present value of each piece of the cash
flow as given in the present value formula here.

Suppose that the right discount rate is 5%.
We can then price the two strategies easily.

Let's first consider strategy A. Its cash flow in period 0
is minus 1 billion.
And here, the numbers are in millions.
In year 1, it's going to return a positive cash
flow of 500 million, in year 2, 400 million, in year 4,
300 million.

With the discount rate of 5%, we can easily
compute the present value of each piece of this cash flow
stream.
1 billion today is 1 billion today in present value.
$500 million in year 1 would be 476.2 million
in present value terms.
$400 million in year 2 would be $362.8 million
in present value terms and so on.
If we add up the present value of each of the pieces,
we get $98.2 million.
That is total present value of strategy A.
We can then do the same for strategy B.
The cash flow from strategy B is given
by the second row in the lower panel in the table,
and the present value is given by the third row.
If we add up the present value of all the pieces for strategy
B, we get $140.8 million.
Now, with the net present value for strategy A and B
respectively, we can easily make a choice.
Clearly, strategy B will give us a higher present value,
and that is a better strategy.
This example shows, if we can value each of the alternatives,
the final decision becomes straightforward.
Pick the one with the highest present value,
assuming it's positive.
We will see more detailed applications later
in corporate investment decisions.