
PROFESSOR: Before moving on, we want
to talk a bit about the unit for measuring cash flows.
They are typically measured in nominal dollars, which
we call the nominal cash flow.
However, what we really care about
should be the actual purchasing power
of the cash flow, which is also called the real cash flow.
When there's inflation, which is present in almost
every economy, these two can be quite different.
Let's consider a simple example.
Suppose that inflation is 4% per year,
and you expect to receive $1.04 in one year.
What is the real value of this cash flow, namely,
its actual purchasing power?
What we need to do is to adjust for inflation.
The inflation adjusted, or the real value
of $1.04 in one year, is given by its nominal value, namely
$1.04, deflated at the annual inflation rate of 4%.
That will give us $1, that is the actual purchasing
power of this cash flow in one year,
namely, the real cash flow.
In general, if the annual inflation rate is i,
and if we are looking at a nominal cash flow, CFT
in year T, the corresponding real cash flow at time T
would be the nominal cash flow discounted
at the annual inflation rate T times.
We can do the same for rate of returns.
For rate of returns, the prevailing market
rates that we see in the market, for example, the interest
rates quoted by banks, are typically
nominal rates of return.
But what we should care about will
be the real rates of return, which are inflation adjusted.
We can actually look at the following example.
Suppose that we have $1 to be invested in a market,
and the market interest rate is 6%, which is in nominal terms.
That means that $1 we put in the bank would turn into $1.06
next year.
But if the inflation rate is 4% per year,
the real value of this $1.06 is just
$1.019 because we have to discount it
by the annual inflation rate of 4%.
This then gives us the real rate of return,
which will just be 1.9%, rather than the nominal 6%.

If we do this in general, the real rate of return
should equal to 1 plus the nominal rate of return
deflated at the inflation rate i, then minus 1.
In the case that both the nominal rate and inflation are
small, we can also approximate this
by just the difference of the nominal rate
minus the inflation.
Let's now consider a concrete example.
Suppose that sales is $1 million this year
and it's expected to have a real growth
of 2% over the next year.
Inflation is expected to be 4%.
The appropriate nominal discount rate is 5%.
What is the present value of next year's sales revenue?
From the information given above,
next year's nominal sales forecast should be $1 million,
which is sales this year times 1 plus 2%, the real growth,
times 1 plus 4%, which is the inflation.
That gives us $1.0608 million in terms of nominal revenue
next year.
Its present value should be $1.0608M discounted
at the nominal discount rate of 5%.
That gives us $1.01 million in present value terms.
We can also do this calculation or valuation
using cash flows and discount rates in real terms.
Next year's real sales forecasts will be $1 million times 1.02.
That's the real growth that gives us $1.02 million
in real revenue.
Then the real discount rate should
be 1 plus the nominal discount rate, divided
by 1 plus the inflation, then minus 1.
Finishing that, that gives us 0.9615%
That's the real discount rate.
Then using the real cash flow and the real discount rate,
we can also get $1.01 million in present value terms.
What this example shows is that when
it comes to the valuation of cash flows,
we should treat inflation consistently.
If we're going to use nominal cash flows,
then we should be using nominal discount rates.
If we are using real cash flows, then we
should also use real discount rates to discount.
It doesn't matter which one we use,
as long as we use both the cash flow and the discount rate
in the same unit, we'll arrive at the right answer.