
PROFESSOR: So far we have been looking
at the simple case in which there's
a single piece of cash flow occurring
one period from today, say, in year 1.
What about a cash flow that's going
to occur many years from today, say, in year T,
and cash flow is CFT.
Well, the present value of this cash flow
can be easily computed by taking the cash flow, CFT, discounted
back at the right discount rate, r, T times.
From now on, for simplicity, we'll use r instead of r bar
to denote the discount rate, unless otherwise noted.

Let's consider a simple example.
Suppose we are choosing between two cash flows: $10 million
in five years, or $15 million in 15 years.
We can't quite just compare the magnitude
because they occur at different points in time.
Which one is better very much depends
on how the market values different cash
flows at different times.
Suppose that the right discount rate is 5%.
Namely, that's the expected return
from these kind of safe cash flows.
Then we can easily compute the present value
for these two pieces of cash flow.
The present value for cash flow A, which is $10 million
in five years, can be discounted at 5% five times.
That gives us a present value of $7.84 million.
For cash flow B, the present value is $15 million,
discounted at 5% 15 times.
That gives us $7.22 million.
Of course, in this case, cash flow A
is better because it has a higher present value.
The previous example also shows how
the present value of a cash flow depends
on how far it is from today.
This is also shown in this graph.
What's shown by that black line is the present value
of the cash flow, $1, when it occurs at different points
of time in the future.
Going from year 1 to from the left to year 20 and 30.
As we can see, as the cash flow is farther and farther away
from today, its present value decreases.
And it's simply because the discount.
When it's far away from today, it
will be discounted many more times.
The present value also depends on the discount rate,
of course.
And what's shown here also will be
how the present value of a cash flow, say $1, for a given time,
say, 10 years.
And then when we change the discount rate from,
let's say, 4%, which is for the black line,
to 8%, which is shown by the dashed red line,
or to 12%, which is shown by the dotted blue line.
Clearly for the same cash flow, same horizon,
if the discount rate increases, its present value decreases.
So this is an important relationship for us
to remember.
Namely, when a discount rate goes up
for the same magnitude of the cash flow,
its present value decreases.