PROFESSOR: In this class, we're going
to talk about revenue recognition, which
is very important, and we're going
to talk about allowances for bad debt and allowance for returns.
Remember, last class, we talked about the accounting equations.
An important one we introduced was the balance sheet equation,
which is assets equals liabilities
plus stockholders' equity.
We talked about some concepts of accrual accounting.
We did some balance sheet equation entries.
And in particular, we used the balance sheet equation
to do Peters Company's financial statements, their balance
sheet, their income statement, and their cash flow
for the first year of Peters' operations.
In this class, we're going to finish out the Peters Company
financial statements, and then we're
going to introduce revenue recognition, how
companies recognize revenue.
And then we're going to introduce allowance accounting,
how companies make estimates for the allowance for bad debt
and allowance for returns.
So remember, from last time, this is where we ended up.
So Peters has two performance measures
that we can look at for a year 1.
The first is net income.
They had net income of $3,000.
The second is cash flow from operations.
So they had cash flow from operations of $8,000.
And then, accruals is the difference
between net income minus cash flow from operations,
so accruals in their first year of operations
were minus $5,000.
Now we're going to do a year 2 of the Peters Company.
Remember in year 1, they got advance payment
from Julie's Company of $6,000.
This year, they're going to ship their remaining inventory
to Julie's Company, receive an additional $24,000.
They're going to pay off the accounts
payable for the inventory they purchased in year 1.
They're going to pay off their wages payable balance.
They're going to get full payment
on their outstanding accounts receivable.
Fifth, they're going to incur and pay wages of $12,000.
And then, the final transaction we'll look at in review
is that they'll pay a dividend of $9,000.