PROFESSOR: So here's our spreadsheet.
Up at the top where it says BB is our beginning balance.
Remember, that's our balance sheet from year one.
So in that balance sheet for example,
we had cash of $31,000.
We had accounts receivable of $4,000 and so on.
In our first transaction, we're going
to ship the remainder of our inventory to Julie's company.
And Julie's company is going to pay us cash at $24,000.
So remember, the first thing we want to do
is keep track of cash.
So we get cash of $24,000.
Now balance the balance sheet equation.
Best way to do that is generally to plug retained earnings.
So we got retained earnings increase of $24,000.
That's part of the revenues we got.
And now when we ship these goods to Julie's company,
we're fulfilling our agreement with them.
So our deferred revenue goes away.
The deferred revenue goes away.
And it becomes regular revenue.
So associated with this transaction,
we're going to recognize $30,000 of total revenue.
And we've done that on separate lines
just to keep track of what we're doing.
Now remember, we shipped some goods to Julie's company.
We shipped the remaining inventory to Julie's company.
So to reflect that on our balance sheet equation,
we're going to remove $5,000 from inventory.
And now we need to balance the balance sheet equation.
And again, if in doubt, put it in a retained earnings.
It goes and retained earnings.
And the annotation there is COGS.
That's our cost of goods sold.
Our second transaction, we pay off our accounts payable.
First, keep track of cash.
Cash goes down by $10,000.
Accounts payable goes away.
In our third transaction, we pay off wages payable.
Cash goes down by 4,000.
The wages payable liability goes down by $4,000.
In our fourth transaction, we receive payment on our accounts
receivable.
So again, cash is going to go up by $4,000.
And that accounts receivable, which
we're going to talk more about it in this class,
it goes away because it turns into cash.
Fifth, we're going to pay--
we're going to incur and pay wages of $12,000.
So we got $12,000 of wage expense.
And our final transaction is we're going
to pay a dividend of $9,000.
So cash goes down by $9,000.
And then retained earnings goes down by the $9,000 dividend.
So we're almost done at this point.
Notice that we have this entry at the bottom, Adj Ent, which
means an adjusting entry.
So we need to look at our assets--
and real accountants do this-- and look at our assets
and see whether our assets are overvalued.
And we look up to prepaid rent.
Remember, we prepaid this rent for this year.
Now the year has gone by, so we no longer have an asset.
So that asset of prepaid rent, the $6,000,
turns into an expense to reflect the fact that we used up
the asset.

Now remember, this is, at least in concept,
an Excel spreadsheet.
So now what we want to do is add all the columns down,
and make sure that assets equals liabilities
plus stockholders' equity.
So ending balance, we've got $24,000 in cash.
And we got the $24,000 in contributed capital.
So we got an asset of $24,000 in cash,
$24,000 in contributed capital.
This is a really simple balance sheet.
At the end of the second year, Peter's company
is no longer an operating company.
And all it has on its balance sheet
is a bunch of cash, which is owned
by its original stockholders.