PROFESSOR: Now, to make up an income statement,
remember and review the income statement
lives over in the retained earnings section,
except for dividends.
So our income statement looks like this.
We've got revenue, cost of goods sold.
We got our gross margin, or gross profit,
which is revenue minus cost of goods sold.
We've got our rent expense, and we got our wage expense.
We've got net income of 7.
So just check over this to make sure
that you're comfortable that this is the income statement.
Now we're going to make a cash flow statement.
Remember, the cash flow statement
lives in the column on the left, which
is Cash, which shows the change in cash for the period.

And if we arrange that cash flow statement,
we began with $31,000 in cash.
We had cash flow from our operations of 2, which
consisted of the cash that we got
from our customers less the cash payment
that we made to our supplier, or our vendor, less our cash wages
payable.
And then finally, we have a cash flow
from financing, which is the dividend, which
gives us ending cash.

So looking, again, at our performance measures, which
are net income and cash flow from operations,
in the first year, remember we had net income of $3,000, cash
flow from operations of $8,000, so accruals
were a minus $5,000.
And then just summarizing from above, in the second year
we have net income of $7,000, cash flow from operations
of $2,000, so our accruals were $5,000 for the year.
And then if we total these across,
we see that we have net income of $10,000 equals cash flow
from operations, and accruals sum
to 0 over the two-year period.
And this illustrates, in a sort of toy example,
a very important concept, which is over the life of the firm,
net income is going to equal to cash flow from operations.
So over the life of the firm-- this firm-- net income was 10.
Cash flow from operations was 10.
And accruals were 0.
Because of the fact that, over the life of the firm,
net income and cash flow from operations are equal,
that means over the life of the firm, accruals are 0.
And that further means that if you have small accruals
early in the life of the firm-- so
with negative accruals in year 1 are going to reverse and become
positive accruals in year 2.
So accruals are going to reverse.
If you have a big accrual in one year,
it tends to become a small accrual the next year.
You have a big negative accrual one year,
it tends to be a big positive accrual the next year.
So what this means is that if we manipulate earnings
by manipulating accruals upward, that upward manipulation
tends to reverse in the next year.
This, in turn, means that it's very difficult
to sustain earnings manipulation,
because the manipulation tends to reverse over the next year.
So we'll come back to this when we discuss the cash flow
statement.