
PROFESSOR: So the main thing we're
going to talk about in the first part of this class
is revenue recognition.
So remember that earnings are the difference between revenues
and expenses.
So revenue recognition tells us when we can recognize revenues.
And then expenses are matched to revenues
by the matching principle.
So revenues are really important in the sense
that it determines how much sales you have and it also
determines how much expenses you have.
So two critical issues are, when do we earn revenues
or when can we recognize the revenues?
That's going to be the first part of this class.
And then later on in this class, we're
going to talk about estimating how much of those revenues
are not going to be paid to us because they're bad debts
or how much of those revenues we're not
going to make because our customers return items.

Now we just want to go through some examples of some revenue
transactions.
So we're going to use Dell as an example.
So many of you have bought a Dell computer.
So you buy a computer over the website.
Let's say, in the first transaction,
you buy a computer for $1,000.
You put in your credit card.
So it's basically a cash transaction.
So let's think about what happens.
Dell's going to get cash of $1,000.
It's going to recognize $1,000 worth of revenue.
The computer cost $500.
So out of its inventory, we're going
to send out a $500 computer, and that'll
be our cost of goods sold for this transaction.
Now let's just do a slightly different transaction
where Dell sells the computer, and instead of getting cash,
it sells it on account, which means it gets
in accounts receivable for it.
So as you can imagine, the transaction's
going to look very much the same.
So we got an accounts receivable instead of cash.
So the customer promised to pay us $1,000 in cash.
We recognize revenue.
We recognize cost of goods sold.
Now let's do something that's a little tricky.
Now Dell gets $1,000 prepayment for a computer.
Does it recognize any revenue?
No, it doesn't recognize revenue because it hasn't delivered
the computer to the customer.
So the way that we're going to account for this
is that Dell gets $1,000 of cash,
and it's going to get some revenue in the future, which
we call deferred revenue.
But that's a liability right now.
Now, sometime in the future, Dell delivers this computer.
What do you think is going to happen then?
So basically, this transaction shows
that the deferred revenue on delivery of the computer
becomes regular revenue.
So deferred revenue is going to go away.
$1,000 is going to decrease deferred revenue.
That'll become regular revenue.
And then the cost of goods sold side of the transaction
is identical.
Revenue recognition is very important
because revenue recognition determines revenue.
Once we recognize revenue, we recognize expenses
by the matching principle.
So revenue recognition determines revenue,
and it determines expenses.
And therefore, it determines earnings.
So the SEC, the US Securities and Exchange Commission,
keeps track of all the kind of corporate fraud
that companies engage in.
And when they look at over a long period of time--
so basically a 32 or 33 year period of time--
most fraud involves misstated revenue.
So that's motivation for what we're going to do
is you need to understand how companies are recognizing
revenue to make sure that you have a sense
that they're recognizing revenue correctly.