PROFESSOR: So the old revenue recognition standard
I like a lot because it's very simple.
You recognize revenue based on two tests.
Number one, did you earn the revenue?
Number two, can you collect the revenue from your customers?
So earned means is the earnings process substantially complete?
Have we delivered the good or service?
And if we've delivered a good, how much of that good
is going to be returned?
Collectible is just can we collect cash from our customers
on our accounts receivable?
So we sell something and get an accounts receivable.
Are we going to collect that accounts receivable
from our customer?
So the old revenue standard, again,
is very nice and intuitive.
Did we earn the revenue?
Can we collect the revenue?

Now, channel stuffing is something
that's very common, where companies,
because they have a fiscal year end,
they want to have sales moved in this year
so that they can have this year sales and profits this year
rather than waiting till next year.
So it has something to do with management compensation.
So here's a Dilbert cartoon that gives us the intuition.
In the left panel, the boss says,
I need everybody's help in the shipping department.
Anything we ship before the end of the month--
this is the center panel--
gets counted as revenue.
And then, the boss says, unfortunately,
we don't have anything to ship.
We don't have any inventory.
So in the final panel, he says, we'll
just ship whatever's lying around.
We'll book it is revenue, and we'll sort it out later.
So that's channel stuffing, where we're basically
trying to bring revenue into this year from next year.
So the question is, can Dilbert's company recognize
revenue in this example?
Clearly, the answer is no, so the revenue's not earned.
So our two tests are is it earned?
It is a collectible?
So clearly, it's not earned.
We haven't shipped the customer anything of value.
Also, it's not collectible.
If we invoice the customers for this stuff,
they won't pay for it.
Now a real-world example of this channel stuffing
was Bausch and Lomb in 1993.
In December of 1993, Bausch and Lomb
realizes that it's $15 million short of its sales budget,
and it's concerned about this because of it doesn't mean
its sales budget, profits are going to be lower,
and executives are not going to get
paid as much of their bonuses.
So they basically have some choices to increase revenues
in December of 1993.
First thing they could do--
and you see a lot of companies doing
this toward the end of their fiscal year end.
We could do more advertising.
We could do more sales promotions.
We could try to get customers to come in and buy stuff.
And then, more aggressively, we can tell customers, anything
you by December 31, 1993, we'll give you a discount on it.
Now this is basically a within GAAP
or non-fraudulent way of channel stuffing.
Now, other ways we could channel stuff
is we get back to January revenues to December 1993.
What I mean by that is stuff that they came in just
at the start of the year in 1994,
we change the invoices to make it look like that stuff came
in December of 1993.
More extremely, we could just make up receipts
and basically make up revenues.
Now, clearly, this is unethical, and this is fraud.
So we have some choices.
We can do something within GAAP to increase sales,
or we can commit fraud as a way of increasing sales.
So what Bausch and Lomb actually did was in late December,
it transferred $22 million of products to its distributors.
And at the time of the transfer of those products,
it recognized $22 million in revenue.
And then, by the matching principle,
we're going to recognize $9 million in cost of goods sold.
So our profits increased $13 million in fiscal year 1993.
Now, let's think about our revenue recognition test.
Is a collectible?
When we ship these goods to our distributors
and they give us an accounts receivable for them,
do we reasonably expect to collect that money
from the distributors?
The answer here is yes.
We've never had any payment problems
with these distributors, so it's definitely the case
that we can collect this.
The second test is did we earn it?
Is the earnings process substantially complete?
And the key thing here is we've shipped $22 million
worth of products to our customers.
How much of that inventory, if any,
is going to be returned to us?
Now, after the fact, it was discovered
that Bausch and Lomb had side agreements allowing
for the products to be returned.
So even though they shipped $22 million of stuff
to their distributors, the distributors
could return that stuff at any point.
And because it did not appropriately reduce revenues
by the expected amount of those returns,
Bausch and Lomb overstated its revenues
and overstated its earnings.
And this is fraud.
And among other things, the CEO got fired for doing this.
But this just illustrates the importance of revenue
recognition and illustrates the importance of understanding,
did we earn the revenue, and can we collect the revenue?