
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we consider
payoffs of the most common types of European options.
Visualizing option payoffs is often
useful for building intuition about the various properties
of these securities.
To start, consider a European call option.
As an example, let it be an option on the stock of IBM.
The exercise price at maturity is $100.
We often call the exercise price of the option the strike price.
This option gives the owner of the option, the buyer,
the right to buy one share of IBM
at $100 on the expiration date.
Note that this is their right and not their obligation.
The buyer may choose not to exercise the option, if doing
so would lead to a loss.
As a result, the pay for this option at maturity cannot be
negative.
In this sense, the call option is
clearly different from a forward agreement,
which is a binding obligation to buy the underlying at maturity.
The payoff of the forward may be positive or negative.
The payoff of the call option of IBM at maturity
depends on the price of IBM at that time.
Let's describe this dependence explicitly.
If the market price of IBM is below the strike price,
the buyer is better off letting the option expire unexercised.
The option to buy IBM at $100 is useless
when the market price of IBM shares is below 100, say $80.
In this situation, the payoff for the option is 0.
If the market price of IBM is above the strike price,
then the buyer would exercise the option
and capture the positive difference
between the market price of IBM and the strike price.
For example, if the price of IBM is $120,
exercising the option to buy it at $100
generates a gain of $20.
In summary, the payoff of an option is never negative.
And sometimes that is positive.
The actual payoff depends on the price of the underlying asset,
in this case, the stock of IBM.
The payoff of the call is the maximum of 0
and the difference between the underlying price of maturity
and the strike price.
We now represent option payoffs graphically.
The top left panel shows the payoff
of a long position in the call option,
with a strike price of $100.
This payoff is 0 when the underlying
price is below the strike.
And it is increasing linearly in the underlying
price for higher values.

For the put option, which is the top right panel,
the payoff is 0 when the underlying
price is above the strike.
Recall that the put option gives the owner the right
to sell the underlying at the strike price.
The payoff of the put is declining in the value
of the underlying asset.
And it is the highest when the underlying price is 0.

The bottom panels show payoffs of the short positions,
in the call on the left and the put on the right.
The payoff of a short position is the negative
of the long position payoff.
The plots are then the mirror images of the long position
payoff plots.
Going forward, we will often combine options
with the underlying asset positions and bonds.
Their payoffs are shown here.
On the left, the plot the payoff of the underlying
asset as a function of itself.
This is, of course, a 45-degree line.
On the right, we show the payoff of the risk-free bond,
which is a constant independent of the underlying price.
It is important to distinguish the payoff of the option, which
is never negative, from its net payoff.
The net payoff of the option includes its cost.
If the option expires unexercised,
its net payoff is negative.
Consider again our example of a European call option on IBM.
The strike price is $100, and the option
has three months to maturity.
Suppose this call is currently trading at $5.
The three-month interest rate, not annualized, is 1%.
At maturity, the call's net payoff
is equal to its payoff minus the future value of the option
price, which is $5.05.
As we see on the graph, the net payoff of the option
is negative for the values of the underlying below the strike
price, and for some values above the strike price.
The break-even point is that value
of the underlying that exceeds the strike by the future value
of the option price.
In this case, the break even is $105.05.
The price of IBM must be above this threshold,
above $105.05, in order for the holder of the option
to make a profit.