
PROFESSOR: We now use payoff diagrams
to visualize properties of the several common options
strategies.
Keep in mind that what we are looking at
are the payoffs, not the net payoffs.
In other words, we are not taking into account
the initial cost of setting up these positions.
The first strategy we consider is the protective put.
This trade consists of two positions, a long position
in the underlying stock, and a long position in the put
option.
The combined payoff is shown in the bottom panel.
The strategy offers the buyer participation in the upside.
This position appreciates in value as the stock price rises.
At the same time, the put option limits potential losses,
creating a floor in the payoff.
The second strategy we consider is the bull spread.
This trade involves two call options of the same maturity.
In this example, the two options have strikes of $40 and $55.
We buy the call with the lowest strike, $40,
and sell the call with the highest strike, $55.
The resulting position, shown in the lower panel,
offers some upside exposure, which is kept above $55.
Compare this to the straight call with the $40 strike.
This position sacrifices participation in further upside
above $55 in exchange for the lower initial cost.
The next rate we consider is the straddle.
The straddle involves buying two options, a call and the put,
with the same strike price and the same maturity date.
The payoff for this position is relatively high
when the stock price is far away from the strike price,
on either side.
We can see this from the payoff diagram in the bottom panel.
Straddles can be used to bet on large moves in the stock price,
regardless of their direction.
In other words, these are bets on higher future volatility
of the underlying price.
Note that buying a straddle is not a free lunch.
It is not right to say that the holder of the straddle
makes money no matter which way the underlying price moves.
Our plots shows strategy payoffs.
They ignore the initial cost.
The buyer of the straddle loses money at maturity
if the underlying price fails to move far enough
away from the strike price.