PROFESSOR: We can think about many corporate securities
as options.
This perspective is very useful for understanding
the properties of corporate securities
and for developing models for the revelation.
To highlight the main idea, consider a firm
with debt in its capital structure, a single bond.
The market value of the firm's assets is $30.
The face value of its bond is $50.
We assume that the bond pays no coupons
and simply promises $50 at maturity.
This firm may default. If its assets are worth less than $50
when the bond matures, the firm will
have to default on its debt.
If that happens, bondholders will own the firm,
and the equity value will be zero.
Next, consider the value of firm's assets
and its equity in alternative scenarios.
In particular, we compare the stock of the firm and a call
option on the underlying assets of the firm with the strike
price of $50, which is the promised amount of its debt.
Compare the second and the third columns in the table.
Note that the stock of the firm generates the same pay off
as a call option on its assets.
Equity is essentially a call option on the firm's assets.
Many corporate securities can be viewed as options.
We have just established that equity
is a call option on the firm's assets with the exercise price
equal to the face value of its debt.
Next, consider the firm's debt.
The payoff of that is equal to the firm's assets
minus the payoff of its equity.
In other words, that is a portfolio
combining the firm's assets and the short position in the call
option on its assets with the exercise
price equal to the face value of its debt.
Warrants are closely related to call options
on the firm's stock.
What makes them different is that when the warrants are
exercised, new shares are issued, which dilutes
the value of the firm's shares.
This dilution effect must be taken into account
when valuing warrants.
Convertible bonds are bonds that can
be converted into equity at a prespecified conversion ratio.
Convertible bonds are similar to a portfolio combining
straight bonds and call options on the firm's stock
with the exercise price related to the conversion ratio.
A callable bond gives the issuer the right to buy the bond back
at a specified price.
From the perspective of the buyer,
a callable bond is a portfolio combining straight bonds
with a short position in a call written on these bonds.