
PROFESSOR: We now use arbitrage arguments to develop
pricing bonds on options.
These bonds are model free.
We do not need to impose any restrictions
on the price process of the underlying asset.
These bonds are important not only because
of their practical implications, but also
because they help us better understand how to use arbitrage
logic to value options.
This is a stepping stone on the way
towards option-pricing models.
We now introduce some notation, which
we will use for the rest of the lecture.
For convenience, we refer to the underlying asset as the stock.
Of course, the underlying could also
be a bond, foreign currency, or some other asset.
S is the price of the stock now.
S sub t is the price of the stock at time, t.
B is the price of the discount bond, paying $1 at maturity
at time, t.
We maintain the assumption that interest rates are positive.
So the price of the bond is less than 1.
C denotes the price of a European call,
with the strike price, K and maturity,
T. P is the price of a European put,
with the strike price, K and maturity,
T. For now we consider only European options, which can
be exercised only at maturity.
We also assume that the underlying asset does not
pay dividends.
Consider the payoff for the option
when the option is exercised.
The resulting cash flow is called the exercise value
of the option.
For a call option, the exercise value
is the difference between the stock price and the strike
price.
For a put, the exercise value is the difference
between the strike and the stock price.
There is some terminology related to this.
We say that the option is in the money
if its exercised its value is positive.
An option is at the money if its exercise value is 0.
And the option is out of the money
if its exercise value is negative.
We now establish pricing bonds for European call options.
First, the payoff of a call can never be negative.
Therefore the price of the option is at least a zero.
Second, the payoff for the option
is bounded from above by the value
of the stock at expiration.
Therefore, the price of the option cannot be higher than
the current price of the stock.

Next, we establish another lower bound on the option price.
Option price is no less than the price of the stock,
minus the present value of the strike price, K.
To establish this result, consider two strategies.
First, buy a call.
Second, buy a share of the stock and borrow the present value
of the strike.
The payoff of the first strategy is at least
as high at maturity of the option as the payoff
of the second strategy.
We conclude that the price of the call
has to be at least as high as the price of the stock,
minus the present value of the strike,
or K times B. If we combine all of the pricing
bounds we have derived, we establish an upper and a lower
bound on the call price.
The call price is bounded above by the stock price.
And it is bounded from below by the maximum of 0
and the stock price minus the present value of the strike.