
PROFESSOR: We now turn our attention to American options.
And the American option allows the buyer
to exercise the option at any time prior to maturity.
Here we establish an important model-free relation
between prices of American and European options.
We know that in general, American options cannot be
worth less than their European counterparts since the holder
of the option can always choose not to exercise the option
until maturity.
We now show that without dividends
and with positive interest rates,
it is never optimal to exercise an American call option early.
Suppose we exercise an American call early.
In that case, the payoff of the option at the point of exercise
is equal to the difference between the stock
price and the strike.

The payoff from immediate exercise
is no more than the market price of the option.
In other words, one would be better off
selling the option than exercising it.
To see why this is the case, note
that the market value of the American call
is at least as high as the market
value of the European call, with the same strike
and the same time to maturity.
We also know from our prior analysis of arbitrage pricing
bonds, that the value of a European call
is no less than the difference between the stock price
and the present value of the strike.
Under positive interest rates, this is at least as high
as the difference between the stock price and the strike
price, which is the payoff from immediate exercise
of the American call.

If it is not optimal to exercise an American call
before maturity, then its market value
must be the same as the value of the corresponding European
call.
In contrast to the American calls,
it may be optimal to exercise an American put even if the stock
does not pay dividends.
Suppose we have a put option with a strike of $10.
Suppose the current stock price is 0.
If we exercise the option immediately, we collect $10.
If we wait and exercise later, we receive no more than $10,
and at a later date.
We conclude that in this case, under positive interest rates,
it is optimal to exercise the option immediately.