
PROFESSOR: So far, we have been focused on model free results.
These are restrictions on option prices
that must hold, regardless of the properties
of the underlying asset.
We now want to refine these results
to make more precise statements about option prices.
To do that, we need to introduce an explicit model
of the underlying price process.
The model we introduce is the binomial model.
This is an important model in option pricing.
This model is highly tractable, so it
helps us understand the logic of option valuation.
It is also very versatile, and is commonly
used for computing option prices numerically.
We start with a single period version of the model.
Current time is zero, and the option matures at time one.
We can only trade today at time zero.
As we will show, option price depends on the current price
of the underlying stock, the strike price, time to maturity,
the risk-free interest rate, and return volatility
of the underlying asset.
We want to highlight that option prices are highly
sensitive to stock return volatility, which
is one of the key inputs into the model.
Consider a specific example--
a European call option on a stock.
The current price of the stock is $50.
There is a single period to maturity.
Over the next period, the price of the stock
will either go up to $75, or down to $25.
There are no dividends.
The strike price of the option is $50.
We assume that the one period interest rate is 10%.
One can borrow or lend without constraints
at this risk-free rate.
We represent the stock price process
on the left as a binomial tree.
The initial price here is $50, rising to $75,
or falling to $25 next period.
We express all other prices in relation to this tree.
For the bond price on the right, the value at time one
is the same in the up and down nodes.
Finally, the value of the option at time one
is a function of the stock price at the corresponding nodes
of the tree.
In the up node, the stock price is $75
and the payoff of a call with the $50 strike is $25.
In the down node, the payoff of the co-option is zero.
Our objective is to figure out the price
of the option at time zero.
Our approach is to form a portfolio of stock and bond
that replicates the payoff of the call option at time one.
Then with the low front price, the initial price of the option
must be equal to the cost of this replicating portfolio.
Suppose our portfolio includes a shares of the stock,
and b units of the riskless bond.
Recall that each unit is $1.
To make sure that the value of the portfolio in the up
and down nodes at time one matches
the value of the option, we impose two conditions.
First, the value of the portfolio in the up node
is $75 times a, which is the stock
price times the number of shares, plus 1.1 times b,
which is the value of the bond times the number of bond
units in the portfolio.
This must equal the value of the bond in the node, which is $25.
Second, $25 times a, which is the price
of the stock in the down node, times the number of shares
plus 1.1 times b, must equal the value of the call option
in the down node, which is zero.
We find a unique solution.
Our replicating portfolio must include
half a share of the stock, and minus 11.36 units of the bond.
In other words, to replicate the option, we must borrow $11.36,
and buy half a share of the stock.
The market value of the call must
equal the current cost of this replicating portfolio, which
is $13.64.
The number of shares in the replicating portfolio
is called the options delta, or the hedge ratio.
In this example, the delta of the option is 0.5.