
PROFESSOR: We now extend our binomial model
to multiple periods.
Suppose that the stock price starts at 50, as before,
and rises or falls by 50% each period for two periods.
The option is a European call with the strike of $50.
At maturity, which is time 2, the option pays 62.5
in the highest node, where the stock price is $112.50,
and nothing in other nodes, where the stock price is below
the strike.
We denote the price of the option in the up node at time 1
by C sub u.
In the down node, it is C sub d.
We first compute the price of the option
in each of the time 1 nodes and then proceed back to time 0.
We start in period 1 in the up node.
The stock price is 75.
As we did for the one period binomial model,
we construct the replicating portfolio.
In this case, the portfolio includes
0.833 shares of the stock and minus 28.4 units
of the risk-free bond.
The cost of this replicating portfolio is $34.075.
This must be the value of the call
option in the up node at time 1 by the law of one price.
In the down node, we are solving the same one-period problem.
The solution in this case is trivial
because the option pays 0 in both of the nodes next period.
The value of the option at time 1 in the down node
is therefore 0.
We move back to time 0.
Again, we are dealing with a single period binomial pricing
model.
The payoff at the end of the period
is given by the option values we have computed for time 1.
These are $34.075 in the up node and $0 in the down node.
We construct the replicating portfolio at time 0
and determine the price of the option
as the cost of this replicating portfolio.
The replicating portfolio at time 0
includes 0.6815 shares of the stock
and minus 15.48 units of the bond.
The cost of the replicating portfolio is $18.60.
This is the value of the option at time 0.
We now combine our results to show how option replication
works over multiple periods.
We start at time 0 with $18.60, which is the value
of the option at time 0.
We borrow $15.48 at a 10% interest rate
to buy 0.6815 shares of the stock.
Note that 0.6815 is the delta of the option at time 0.

At time 1, consider the up node first.
In this node, our replicating portfolio
is worth $34.075, which is equal to the value
of the option at that node.
We rebalance our portfolio.
In addition to $34.075, we borrow
$28.4 at 10% interest rate to buy 0.833 shares of the stock.
One period later, at time 2, the pay for this portfolio
exactly matches the payoff of the call option.
In the down node at time 1, the option is worth 0,
and we have no stocks or bonds in the replicating portfolio.
The bottom line is that no matter what
happens to the stock price between time 0
and option maturity, our replication strategy
generates the same terminal value as the option.
By the law of one price, the initial cost
of the replicating portfolio must equal
the market price of the option.
To compute the value of the option,
we used the following inputs--
the current price of the stock, the magnitude of stock returns,
up or down--
this is a measure of stock return volatility--
the risk-free interest rate, the strike price of the option,
and its time to maturity.
It is important that we did not use
the probabilities of the up and down nodes in the stock price.
And we did not use any information about investor's
risk tolerance.
We did not need this information because our pricing argument
relies on option replication.
We replicate the option state by state,
no matter what happens to the stock price.
As a result, we do not need to know
how likely one state is over the other
or how investors feel about gains and losses.

The binomial model is clearly restrictive
and raises several questions.
As we apply the model, what should be
the length of each time step?
In the data, prices can clearly take more than two
possible values each period.
How can we reconcile this with the binomial model?
The binomial model has discrete time steps,
while in reality, trading takes place almost continuously.
Is the binomial model a good description of stock returns?
All of these concerns can be addressed by shortening
the time step in the model.
We will explore this in the second part of the lecture.
As we reduce the time step in the binomial model,
we will derive the celebrated Black-Scholes-Merton option
pricing model.