
PROFESSOR: Hi, everyone.
Welcome to the seventh recitation of the Financial
Accounting course.
In this recitation, we'll cover bonds and long term debt
and leases.
Before we get into any of the details of bond accounting,
let's familiarize with the terminology
commonly used in bonds.
First, par value, or face value, is the amount
that is returned to the investor when the bond materials.
For example, if a bond is bought at issuance for $1,000,
the investment bought the bond at its par value.
At the maturity date, the investor
will get back the $1,000.
Maturity of a bond is the length of time
until the bond comes due and the bondholder receives
the par value of the bond.
It is the date the firm must repay
the investors their principal.
Coupon rate, or coupon interest rate,
is the interest rate that the issuer of the bond
promises to pay the bond holder.
The coupon rate is used to determine the periodic cash
payments, if there is one.
There are three interest rates that are
relevant to bond accounting.
First the coupon rate, which I talked about
in the previous slide.
It's the interest rate stated in the bond.
The periodic cash payments made to investors
will be the coupon rate times the par value of the bond.
Coupon payments are typically semi-annual.
The second is the market interest rate at issuance.
This is the rate that determines the interest
expense and the book value of the liability at issuance.
This is also known as the effective interest rate.
Note that this rate is fixed at the time of issuance.
The third rate is the market interest rate
in the current period.
This is the rate that determines the current market
value of the bond.
And this rate is based upon market conditions and risk
characteristics of the borrower.
Note that this rate fluctuates over time.
Largely, there are three cases for bond accounting.
First, there are bonds issued at par, where the market
rate equals the coupon rate.
Second, there are zero coupon bonds,
which have no coupon payment and a repayment
only due at maturity.
Please see the class video for accounting
for these two types of bonds.
The type of bonds I plan to focus on in this recitation
is bonds issued at discount or premium.
Discount bonds are bonds where the coupon rate
is lower than the market rate.
Premium bonds are the exact opposite, where the coupon rate
is higher than the market rate.