
PROFESSOR: This section deals with leases.
What are leases?
Leases or whatever the lessee rents from the lessor.
In this recitation, we are interested in accounting
for lessee's side of transaction.
There are two types of leases--
finance and operating leases.
The accounting for these two methods is different.
Let's first look at finance leases.
Finance leases have the same accounting rules as before.
It's just that the terminology changed from capital lease
to finance at lease recently.
Here's an example.
Suppose the lease consists of 10 annual payments of $25,000,
with an interest rate of 5%.
At the time of acquisition, how much
do we recognize as assets or liabilities?
To record the value of the financial squeeze
on the balance sheet, we need to calculate the sum
of present values of the lease.
We can do this by either calculating the present value
directly, as in the first table, or by linking up
the present value annuity table, like the second one.
Whatever the method you use, the present value of the lease
is approximately $193,000.
To report this on the balance sheet,
we first increased the item lease assets
by the present value of the lease, $193,000, and also
the lease obligation on that account under liabilities
by the same amount.
The previous slide showed how to account
for leases at inception.
What happens as the time passes and the lease progresses?
In the following periods, we need to book two things--
one, the amortization of the lease asset, and two,
lease payment covers interest expense and repays
part of the obligation.
Calculating amortization expenses simple.
You simply take the lease obligation
and divide it by the lease contract period.
In this case, divide $193,000 by 10 years,
which yields 19.3 thousand dollars for annual amortization
expense.
Calculating interest expense is similar to the method
you have seen for calculating interest expense for discount
or premium bonds.
The interest expense is remaining lease obligation
times the interest rate.
In year 1, the remaining obligation is $193,000.
And multiplying that by 5%, the interest rate
gives $9,650 of interest expense.
Notice that we paid $25,000 in cash in reality for the lease.
The difference of $15,350 decreases the lease obligation.
In the second year, the amortization
stays the same as 19.3 thousand.
To calculate the interest expense,
we obtained the remaining lease obligation,
which is $193,000 minus $15,350, which we reduced the lease
obligation, and multiply that by 5%.
This yields interest expense of $8,880.
Again cash decreases by $25,000, and lease obligations
will decrease by $16,120 to balance the equation out.
After the second year, the in tuition for accounting finance
leases is that we pay a fixed amount every year of $25,000.
And part of the payment is interest expense,
which is calculated as a percentage of remaining
obligation.
And the rest of the payment is paying back
the lease obligation.
Remember, interest is only paid on the remaining lease
obligation.
As lease obligation decreases, interest expense decreases
and a larger fraction of payment goes towards paying down
the principal.
What about operating leases?
Although in the past, accounting for operating leases
was straightforward, recent rule changes
have made operating leases accounting trickier.
First, at inception, record assets and liabilities as you
did with the finance lease.
Thereafter, there are two differences
from the finance lease.
First, rerecords lease expense, which is the direct cash
payments you make each year.
Second, the asset value is different.
Instead of amortizing the lease asset,
we reduce the value of the asset by the same amount
we reduce the liability.
Returning to the previous example,
and let's assume that this time the lease
is classified as an operating lease, not financing lease.
The BSE at inception is exactly the same
as the one you've seen for the finance lease.
After the first year, how do we account for operating leases?
For operating leases, there's no amortization expense.
Instead, you have a less expensive $25,000,
which can be directly matched to cash payment of $25,000.
In addition, although there's no interest expense,
there's something related to that.
The lease assets and lease obligations
are deducted each year, using this interest expense.
The amount reducing these assets and lease obligations
is calculated as follows.
First, we obtain the interest expense,
as we would for finance lease.
Then from the finance lease, $25,000,
which is a straight line expense,
we subtract the interest expense, which
is $9,650 in this example.
The remaining amount is $15,350, which
is deemed to be the amount to reduce lease obligations.
We reduce lease assets and lease obligations
at the same time by this amount.
In the second year, the process is similar.
Lease expense stays the same, at $25,000.
Then we again obtain the interest expense,
which is $193,000 minus $15,350, which is the lease obligations
amount reduced last year, and multiply that by 5%.
The interest expense is $8,880.
To calculate the amount paid back,
we subtract interest expense from the straight line
expense, which is $25,000, minus $8,080, equals $16,120.
Again, this will reduce lease obligations and lease assets
simultaneously.