
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider a comprehensive multi-asset example in which we
will build an optimal tangency portfolio,
compute its Sharpe ratio, and compute
the return-to-risk ratios of individual assets.
Suppose that there are 10 stocks in the market, the expected
returns on which follow the following two-factor model.
In this model, parameters are as follows.
b1 equals to 10 for each of the 10 stocks.
b2 equals i, which means that for stock 1,
this parameter equals to 1.
And for stock 10, this parameter equals to 10.
F1 has zero mean and standard deviation of 1%.
Factor 2, F2, has a mean of 1% and a standard deviation of 1%
as well.
And the idiosyncratic shock epsilon
has zero mean and a standard deviation of 30%.
We will assume that factors F1 and F2 and the idiosyncratic
component epsilon are independent of each other.
We will also assume that there is
a risk-free asset in this market with a guaranteed
return of 0.75%.
We will first consider an equally weighted portfolio.
We will compute its Sharpe ratio.
And then we will compute return-to-risk ratio
for each individual asset for this portfolio.
Next we'll find the tangency portfolio.
We'll compute its Sharpe ratio.
We will compare the Sharpe ratio of this tangency portfolio
to an equally-weighted portfolio.
Then we will compute the return-to-risk ratio
for each individual asset for this tangency portfolio.
Let's start by computing expected returns,
variances, and covariances for our assets.
The expected return on stock i is given
by the following expression.
Recall that the mean of Factor 1 is zero
and the mean of Factor 2 is 1.
The mean of the idiosyncratic shock is 0 as well.
Therefore, the expected return on stock i
would simply be b2i coefficient multiplied by 1%,
Recall that b2i, for each asset i, simply equals to i.
This means that for the first stock,
the expected return is 1%.
For the second stock, the expected return
is 2%, et cetera.
And for the 10th stock, the expected return is 10%.
The variance of returns on stock i
equals to the sum of variances of b1F1 b2iF2
and the idiosyncratic component epsilon.
This is due to the fact that F1, F2, and epsilon
are independent of each other.
This gives us the following expression.
Recall that standard deviation of F1 and F2 is 1%
and the standard deviation of epsilon is 30%.
Therefore, the variance of returns on stock i
is given by the following expression at the bottom.
Next, let's compute the covariance of returns
between stocks i and j.
The covariance is given by the following expression.
Recall that, again, Fs are independent of each other
and of epsilon.
Therefore, this covariance will simply be the variance of b1F1,
and the covariance between b2iF2 and b2jF2.
This, in turn, equals to the following expression.
And plugging in variances for F1 and F2
will get that the covariance between the stock
returns on i and j is given by the expression at the bottom.
For this question, we will do all our calculations in Excel,
using matrix notation.
Before we do that, let me remind you of notation.
w is the vector of portfolio weights.
r bar is the vector of expected returns.
x bar is the vector of expected excess returns.
And sigma is the covariance matrix.
Given this notation, the expected return
on the portfolio w can be computed
by transposing the vector of weights, w,
multiplying by the vector of expected returns.
And the variance of the portfolio
can be computed by transposed vector of weights,
w, multiplied by covariance matrix sigma, multiplied
by the vector of weights, w.
Based on the results that we derived for expected returns,
variances and covariances, I have created the spreadsheet
that contains expected returns on all 10
stocks in this vector.
And this is the covariance matrix sigma.
So recall that the first question
is asking us to compute the expected return
variance and, eventually, the Sharpe
ratio of the equally-weighted portfolio.
Because we have 10 stocks, the equally-weighted portfolio
would invest 10% into each of these 10 stocks.
Let's first compute the expected return.
To do this, I will first transpose the matrix
of weights, or the vector.
And then, I will multiply this transposed vector
by the vector of expected returns.
And this would be the expected return on this portfolio, which
equals to 5.5%.

Next, we can compute the variance.
Remember that the variance is the transposed matrix
of weights.

This matrix is multiplied by the covariance matrix here
which, in turn, is multiplied again by the weights vector.

And this would give us the variance of this portfolio.
The standard deviation is just simply the squared root
of this variance.
And then the Sharpe ratio, by definition,
is the expected return on this portfolio
minus the risk-free rate divided by standard deviation.
So the Sharpe ratio of this equally-weighted portfolio
is 0.32.
Next, we will compute the return-to-risk ratio
for our stocks and our equally-weighted portfolio.
Let me remind you that the return-to-risk ratio is given
by the ratio of the excess return
on stock i divided by the covariance of returns
on the stock i in portfolio p, divided
by the standard deviation of portfolio p.
Let me also remind you that the covariance between stock
i and portfolio p can be computed
as the sum of pairwise covariances of stock i
and stocks j in the portfolio, where the weights are
the portfolio weights.
For an equally-weighted portfolio,
this is just the sum of all covariances
divided by the number of stocks in the portfolio.
Let's compute the return-to-risk ratio
for our 10 stocks in our equally-weighted portfolio.
First, I'm computing covariance, which
is just the weighted average of individual covariances.
And based on this, I'm using our expression
for return-to-risk ratio.
And I'm computing this return-to-risk ratio
based on this covariance that we just obtained.
And I'm doing this for all 10 stocks.
The results show us that stock 1 contributes
the least to the portfolio in terms of risk return trade off.
And stock 10 contributes the most.
And you can see that this contribution pattern is linear,
meaning that the stocks 10, 9, 8,
and so forth contribute more compared to stocks 1, 2, 3.
This means that we can increase the Sharpe ratio
by increasing the weights of these later stocks
in the portfolio.
So for example, if we increase the weight of stock 10
and decrease the weight of stock 1,
the Sharpe ratio of the portfolio should increase.
Let's see.
So our original Sharpe ratio was 0.32.
If I decrease the weight on the stock 1 to 5%,
and increase the weight of the stock 10 to 15%, what we get
is that the Sharpe ratio increases to 0.34.
Overall, the fact that the return-to-risk ratio
varies across different assets means that this portfolio
is not efficient.
In the next video, we will construct tangency portfolio
and demonstrate its efficiency.