
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will cover the basics
of portfolio risk and return.
Suppose there are three stocks in the market, A, B, and C,
with the following properties.
The expected return on stock A is 5%.
The expected return on stocks B and C is 20%.
The standard deviation of returns of stock A is 10%,
and the standard deviation of returns on stocks B and C
is 40%.
The return on stock C is not correlated with A and B,
and the correlation of returns between A and B
is negative 0.5.
We will answer the following three questions.
In part a, we will assume that an investor allocates
40% of her wealth to stock A, 60% to stock C,
and nothing to stock B. What is the standard deviation
and expected return of her portfolio?
In part b, we will assume that an investor allocates
40% of her wealth to stock A, 60% of stock B,
and nothing to stock C. We will answer
exactly the same question.
So we'll find the standard deviation
and the expected return on her portfolio.
And finally, in part c, we will assume
that an investor constructs an equally weighted portfolio out
of these three stocks, A, B, and C,
and we will compute the standard deviation and expected return
of her portfolio.
Let's denote by Ws portfolio weight.
In part a, we have the following portfolio.
40% invested into stock A, nothing in stock B, and 60%
into stock C. By definition, the expected return
is the weighted average of expected returns
on individual stocks where weights
are the portfolio weights.
So, therefore, in our case, it is simply
40%, which is the weight on stock
A in this portfolio, multiplied by 5%, which is the expected
return on stock A, plus 60% weight on stock
C in our portfolio multiplied by 20%
expect the return on stock C. The middle term,
WB times R bar B is absent from this equation because WB is 0.
So this gives us 14% expected return on this portfolio.
Next, let's compute portfolio variance.
When we have three stocks, portfolio variance
is given by the following expression.
The first three terms are portfolio weight squared
multiplied by individual variances of stocks,
and the remaining three terms are pairwise covariances
multiplied by the weights of corresponding stocks.
Recall that in our case, returns on stocks A and C
and B and C are not correlated.
Therefore, covariance terms are 0.
Also recall that A and B are correlated.
We're given the correlation coefficient.
Recall that the covariance equals correlation
multiplied by the standard deviation
of corresponding stocks.
Putting all these facts together,
we'll get the following.
Because WB is 0 and because the covariance of returns
on A and C is 0 as well, portfolio
variance in this case is effectively just this--
weight on A squared times the variance of returns
on A plus weight on C squared times the variance of returns
on C. Plugging in the numbers, we
obtain the following variants of this portfolio.
Taking the square root of this number,
we obtain portfolio standard deviation, which in this case
is 24.33%.
Now let's do the same for portfolio in part b.
Record that this portfolio invests 40% in A, 60% in B,
and nothing in C. The expected return in this case
would equal to weight on A times the expected
return on A plus weight on B times the expected return on B.
The term C would not be there because weight is 0.
So we get the following, 40% times 5%, 60% times 20%,
this gives us the expected return
on this portfolio of 14%.
Recall that the expected return on portfolio in part a
was also 14%.
The reason is that the expected returns on stocks B and C
are the same 20%, and the only difference between these two
portfolios is that, in part a, we put 60% on C,
and, in part b, we put 60% on B.
Because returns on stocks A and B are correlated,
portfolio variance will have the term
that captures this correlation.
I highlighted it here in red.
So it's 2 times the weight on stock A
in this portfolio times the weight on stock
B times the standard deviation of returns on A,
which is 10%, times the standard deviation of returns
on B, which is 40%, times the correlation, which
is negative 0.5.
This gives us the variance of 0.0496.
Taking the square root of this, we
obtain portfolio standard deviation of 22.27%.
Finally, let's compute the expected return and standard
deviation of the portfolio in part c.
Recall that it's an equally weighted portfolio, which
means we put one third of our wealth into these three stocks.
The expected return on this portfolio is 15%.

The variance of this portfolio is given by this expression.
The first three terms are the weights multiplied
by the variance of corresponding stocks,
and the remaining term is 2 times the weights on stocks A
and B multiplied by the standard deviations of these stocks
multiplied by the correlation of returns on A and B. Recall
that because returns on A and C and B and C
are not correlated, therefore, there are no additional two
terms in this expression.
This gives us the variance of 0.0322,
and the standard deviation of 17.95%.
Let's summarize the results.
The expected return on portfolio a was 14%, b was 14% as well,
and on portfolio c it was 15%.
The standard deviations were 24.33 for portfolio a,
22.27 for portfolio b, and 17.95 for portfolio c.
Portfolio a has the same expected return as portfolio b.
However, because correlation between stocks A and B
is lower than between stocks A and C,
portfolio b has lower volatility.
Equally weighted portfolio c has high expected return
and lower volatility than portfolios
a and b because it takes fuller advantage of low correlation
between the three stocks, and as a result,
achieves a better risk-return trade off.
