
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to construct optimal portfolios that
achieve highest Sharpe ratios.
We will work with the same two stocks, A and C,
that we worked with in the previous question.
In addition to these two stocks, we will add a riskless asset
with a guaranteed return of 3%.
Suppose that there are two investors, X and Z, who
maximize risk-return tradeoff and have
mean-variance preferences.
Investor X can only invest in stocks A and C.
But investor Z, in addition to being
able to invest in stocks A and C,
can also invest in the riskless bond.
Investor X targets standard deviation of 20%,
and investor Z targets standard deviation of 12%.
We will answer the following questions.
A, what is the maximum Sharpe ratio investor X can achieve?
B, what is the maximum Sharpe ratio investor Z can achieve?
C, describe the portfolio of investor Z.
What is the expected return of this portfolio?
And D, if investor X had access to the risk-free asset,
could her return have been improved?
If yes, compute the expected return for the 20% target
level of risk.
Let's start with part a and compute the Sharpe ratio
of investor X's portfolio.
Recall that in the previous video,
we have already found the maximum expected return
that the investor X can achieve on the portfolio
with the target level of risk of 20%.
The answer was 12.25%.
By definition, Sharpe ratio is the difference
between the expected return on the portfolio
minus the risk-free rate divided by the standard deviation
of the portfolio.
Notice that for this investor, this is the maximum Sharpe
ratio, because 12.25% return is the maximum achievable return
for the level of risk of 20%.
Therefore, this investor can achieve
the Sharpe ratio of 0.462.
Next, let's find the maximum Sharpe ratio
that investor Z can achieve.
To do this, let's find a portfolio
of risky assets, A and C, which has the highest Sharpe ratio.
Suppose that in this portfolio, x is invested into stock A
and 1 minus x is invested into stock C.
To find the maximum Sharpe ratio,
we need to solve the following optimization problem.
In the numerator, we have expected return
minus the risk-free rate.
And in the denominator, we have the standard deviation
of this portfolio.
Notice that since covariance of returns on stocks A and C is 0,
the additional covariance term is
absent from this expression in the denominator.
Before we formally solve this optimization problem,
let's first see how Sharpe ratio visually looks like.
In this spreadsheet, I constructed various portfolios
that consist of stocks A and C from 0%
to 100% in 1% increments.
What I will do right now is I will compute Sharpe ratio
for each of these portfolios.
I have already computed expected return
on each of these individual portfolios.
And I have also computed the standard deviation
on these portfolios as well.
So now Sharpe ratio, by definition,
is the difference between expected return
minus the risk-free rate divided by the standard deviation
of the portfolio.
And so for this first portfolio, the Sharpe ratio is 0.425.
Now, we can extend this array and compute Sharpe ratios
for the remaining portfolios.
And now let's plot them and see how it looks like.
So this is the graph that depicts the Sharpe ratio.
So we can see that it starts low.
It's slowly increasing.
It achieves the maximum somewhere.
And then it starts declining.
So the goal right now is to find,
analytically, the maximum Sharpe ratio.
I will use Excel to solve this optimization problem.
You're welcome to use other tools or other software.
Here, in this cell, I have put weight
that I will allocate to stock A. For now, we'll
just put 0 in here.
And in my optimization routine, I will optimize over this cell.
In the cell next to it, I put the complementary weight
that I will put on stock C. This is
just 1 minus whatever the weight I put on stock A. In this cell,
I have computed the Sharpe ratio for this portfolio
with this weight, given our parameters
for the expected return for stocks A and C
and their standard deviations and the risk-free rate.
Now what I will do is that I will
use Solver to maximize this cell, N8, by changing
the weight that I'm putting on stock A. And when I hit Solve--
Solver-- this is a very simple optimization problem--
it'll optimize and find the optimal allocation that
gives the highest Sharpe ratio.
In this case, the allocation will
be 65.31% invested into stock A and 34.69% invested
into stock C.
The portfolio that we just found,
by maximizing the Sharpe ratio, is the tangency portfolio.
The expected return, in this case, on the tangency portfolio
is 10.2%, and the standard deviation is 15.34%.
Now, let's go back to our investor Z.
Recall that she's trying to construct
a portfolio with the target volatility of 12%.
The portfolio that we just constructed,
the tangency portfolio, has the highest Sharpe ratio,
but it has a volatility of 15.34%.
Therefore, this investor cannot just invest in the tangency
portfolio to achieve this target volatility.
The solution is to mix the tangency portfolio
and the risk-free asset.
Suppose that she invests x into the tangency portfolio
and 1 minus x into the risk-free asset.
The variance of this portfolio will
be x squared multiplied by the variance
of the tangency portfolio plus 1 minus x squared multiplied
by the variance of the risk-free asset.
Notice that the covariance term here is missing,
because the covariance between anything that is risky
and the risk-free asset is 0.
The variance of the risk-free asset, of course, is 0 as well.
So therefore, this equation just becomes
x times sigma T equals to 0.12, which is our target standard
deviation.
Solving this equation gives us 78.24%.
This means that to achieve the target standard
deviation of 12% and the maximum possible return,
Z needs to invest 78.24% into the tangency portfolio
and 21.76% into the risk-free asset.
Recall, the tangency portfolio is 65.31% A
and 34.69% C. This means that investor Z's portfolio is
as follows.
21.76% invested into the risk-free asset.
51.10% invested into stock A, which we computed
by multiplying the weight of investor Z in the tangency
portfolio, 78.24%, by the weight of stock A in the tangency
portfolio, 65.31%.
And finally, 27.14% in investor Z's portfolio
is allocated to stock C, which again,
is computed by multiplying 78.24% by 34.69%.
Finally, we can compute the expected return
on investor Z's portfolio, which is 8.64%.
Taking it altogether, if investor Z targets
the standard deviation of 12%, the optimal portfolio
yields 8.64% expected return.
In the final part of this question,
we were asked whether investor X can achieve a higher risk
return tradeoff if she could have invested
in the risk-free asset as well.
Let's find the mix of the tangency portfolio
and the risk-free asset that achieves this target
level of standard deviation.
We can use the same equation as we've written for investor Z.
In this case, I'll use equation for x, which gives us 130.40%.
This means that investor X needs to invest 130.40%
into the tangency portfolio and negative 30.40%
into the risk-free asset, effectively shorting it
and investing these proceeds from the short sale
into the tangency portfolio.
Given the weights of stocks A and C
in the tangency portfolio, we can
compute the weights of stocks A and C
in investor X's portfolio.
So investor X's portfolio looks like this--
30.40% short position in the risk-free asset,
85.16% long position in stock A, and the 45.24% long position
in the stock C.
Now we can compute the expected return of investor X's
portfolio, which is 12.39%.
Recall that without access to the risk-free rate,
investor X could have only obtained a return of 12.25%.
Now, with access to risk-free asset,
she's able to achieve additional 0.14% return without increasing
the risk of her portfolio.
The reason for this high return is
that when investor X has access to the risk-free asset,
she's able to achieve risk return combinations
on the capital market line, which is denoted
on this graph in red line.
Without access to the risk-free asset,
the only achievable portfolios for her
are the ones on the blue line.