
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to construct portfolios
with target level of expected return or target level of risk.
Suppose there are two stocks, A and C,
with the following properties.
The expected return on stock A is 5%.
And the expected return on stock C is 20%.
The standard deviation of returns in stock A is 10%.
And the standard deviation of returns in stock C is 40%.
The returns on stocks A and C are not correlated.
First, we will build a portfolio with expected return of 10%.
Next, we will assume that the maximum level
of risk that an investor can afford to take is 20%.
We will build a portfolio that achieves
this target level of risk.
And we will find the expected return of that portfolio.
Finally, we will assume that there is an investor
with low tolerance for risk.
We will construct a minimum variance portfolio
for this investor.
And we will find the expected return of this portfolio.
Let's first build a portfolio with the target
expected return of 10%.
Suppose that we invest x in stock A and the remaining
amount, 1 minus x, into stock C. Then,
the expected return would be x times the expected return
of stock A plus 1 minus x, the expected return on stock C.
And that should equal to 10%, which is our target.
Plugging in the numbers for expected return on A,
which is 5%, and the expected return on C, which is 20%,
we get this equation.
So this is just the equation with one unknown.
Solving this equation, we get x that equals to 2/3.
This means that to achieve this target level of expected
return, we need to invest 2/3 of our wealth into stock A
and the remaining 1/3 of our wealth into stock C. Next,
let's build a portfolio with a target
level of volatility of 20%.
This 20% is a standard deviation.
Suppose that we invest x into A and 1 minus x into C. Then,
portfolio variance would be x squared
multiplied by the variance of stock A, which
is 0.1 squared, plus 1 minus x squared--
this is the weight that we put into stock C squared--
times the variance of stock C. And that
should equal to the target variance
that we are trying to achieve, which is 20% squared.
Rearranging terms in this equation,
we get the following quadratic equation.
Solving this equation, we get two roots--
x equals to 1.365 and x equals to 0.517.
This implies that we have two portfolio candidates.
In the first portfolio, we invest 136.5% into stock A
and negative 36.5% into stock C. This
means that we are effectively shorting stock C
and putting the dollar proceeds from this short sale
into stock A.
And the second candidate is where we invest 51.7% into A
and 48.3% into stock C. Both of these portfolios
achieve the target level of volatility of 20%,
but which one is better?
Let's compute the expected return
and see which of these portfolios
gives us a higher return.
The expected return of the first portfolio is negative 0.48%.
And the expected return of the second portfolio is 12.25%.
So clearly, the second portfolio gives higher risk
return tradeoff, and therefore this
is the optimal portfolio for the target level of risk
that we are trying to achieve.
Finally, let's find the minimum variance portfolio.
Let's, again, suppose that we invest x into A and 1
minus x into C. To find the minimum variance portfolio,
we need to minimize this variance with respect to x.
Solving this minimization problem,
we'd get that x equals to 94.12%.
Therefore, to construct the minimum variance portfolio,
we invest 94.12% into stock A and 5.88%
into stock C. This portfolio achieves
the standard deviation of 9.7% and the expected
return of 5.88%.
