
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
work with the same multi-asset example.
We will find the tangency portfolio,
then we will compute its Sharpe ratio,
and we will compute return to risk ratio
for each individual asset for the tangency portfolio.
Record that the tangency portfolio
is given by the following expression written
in the matrix form.
To find tangency portfolio, we first
need to invert the covariance matrix.
I will use an inverse function to do this.

Next, let's compute lambda.
Recall that lambda is the following scalar.
It's 1 divided by the transposed vector of excess returns, which
I put here, multiplied by the inverse covariance
matrix, which we just computed here,
multiplied by the vector of ones, which I put here.
Now let's do this calculation step by step.
So first I will transpose the vector of excess returns.
Now I will multiply this vector by the inverse covariance
matrix, and now I will multiply this product
by the vector of ones.

Now we need to invert this number to obtain lambda.
So I'll take 1, and I'll divide it by this product.
Now we can find tangency portfolio.
To do this, I'll multiply lambda by the matrix product
of the inverse covariance matrix and the vector
of excess returns, and this would give me portfolio weights
in the tangency portfolio.
Notice that in the tangency portfolio,
the weight of each stock increases from stock 1
through stock 10.
In fact, we're shorting the first three stocks,
and we're allocating a significant fraction
of our wealth to the last three stocks.
Let's compute the expected return, variance,
standard deviation, and the Sharpe ratio
of the tangency portfolio.
Let's start with the expected return.
I will transpose the vector weights
in the tangency portfolio, and I will
multiply this vector of weights by the expected
return on individual stocks.

This gives me the expected return
on the tangency portfolio of 9.3%.
Recall that the expected return on the equally
weighted portfolio was 5.5%.
So we can already see that the tangency portfolio yields
much higher expected return.
To compute the variance, I will again
transpose the vector weights of the tangency portfolio.
I will multiply these vector weights
by the covariance matrix, and then
I'll multiply this result again by the vector weights,
and this will give me the variance of this portfolio.
The standard deviation is just the square root
of the variance, and the standard deviation
of this portfolio is 20.8%.
So it is higher than the standard deviation
of the equally weighted portfolio, which was 14.84%.
Finally, now we can compare the Sharpe ratio, which
is the difference between the expected return
minus the risk-free rate divided by the standard deviation
of this portfolio, and the Sharpe ratio of this portfolio
is 0.41.
Recall that the Sharpe ratio of the equally weighted portfolio
was 0.32.
Therefore, we can see that the tangency portfolio exhibits
a much better risk return trade off compared to the equally
weighted portfolio.
Finally, let's compute return to risk ratio
for our individual stocks and the tangency portfolio.
First, let me compute covariances
between individual stocks and the tangency portfolio.
To do this, I will multiply each row of the covariace matrix
by the vector weights of the tangency portfolio, which
I have right here.
So this first number gives me the covariance
of returns on stock 1 with the returns
on the tangency portfolio.
Now we can extend the cell and compute this covariance
for the remaining nine stocks.
Before we do that, I will fix the array
where we have the weights of the tangency portfolio
so that it doesn't move when I extend this cell.
Now that we have our covariances computed,
we can compute the return to risk ratio for each stock.
To do this, let's take the return on each stock,
subtract the risk-free rate, and divide this
by the ratio of this covariance divided
by the standard deviation of the tangency portfolio,
and this would be the return to risk ratio for the first stock.
Now I can extend this array and compute return
to risk ratio for the remaining nine stocks.
Perhaps not surprisingly, return to risk ratio
is the same for each of the 10 stocks.
Moreover, this return to risk ratio for individual assets
is the same as the Sharpe ratio for the tangency portfolio.
This result implies optimality of the tangency portfolio.
We cannot perturb the weights of individual assets in this
portfolio to further increase its risk return trade off.