
PROFESSOR: To further illustrate these points,
let's consider an example.
Suppose that Mass Biz is a company which
is listed on NASDAQ.
It is considering two business plans, A and B.
They are mutually exclusive.
That is, we can only choose one.
We have the following information on these two plans.
Both plans have positive NPV.
Plan A has an NPV of $50 million.
That is, if it's taken, the current market value
of the company will increase by $50 million.
Plan B has an NPV of $80 million.

Plan A pays off in three years and plan
B pays off in 10 years.
In other words, they have quite a different horizons.

Plan A expands the firm's current business
with relatively low risk.
Plan B is to enter a new line of business, which
involves much higher risk.
Which one should the firm take?
The CEO is recommending plan B to the board
as it has a higher NPV.
$80 million over $50 million.
Since Mass Biz grew out of a family business,
its board consists of three controlling shareholders
from the founding family, grandma, dad, and son.
Here are their reactions after hearing from the CEO.
Grandma dislikes B. I'm already 85
and probably won't be around to see any of its payoffs.
Dad is also averse to B. It's too risky.
I plan to enjoy a quiet retirement
and have little appetite for risk.
Son has serious reservations on B.
The market is over hyped on the kind of business
B is getting into.
As the CEO, how should you respond?

Clearly, shareholders' views are dictated
by their own financial objectives and perspectives,
which are perfectly reasonable, but also quite divergent.
Fortunately, as far as the firm's decision is concerned,
it need not to be influenced by shareholder preferences.
In particular, by taking plan B, every shareholder's wealth
will increase more by her or his share of the $30 million
difference immediately.
This makes all of them better off.

Grandma should not worry about how long it takes for plan B
to pay off.
Some investors in the market will live to see these payoffs.
That is why they are willing to pay $80 million today for it.
If grandma needs money for current use,
she can simply sell some of her shares at a high price now
to raise cash.
There's no need for dad to worry about the risk of plan
B. He does not have to bear the risk of plan B. If he prefers,
he could sell his shares at a high price now for cash
and then use the cash to buy safer assets,
like government bonds or low risk stocks, only more of them.
Son does not have to agree with the current market prices.
The key is that some investors in the market
are willing to pay the price, $80 million,
for plan B. If son is not sure about this valuation, again,
he can liquidate his shares after taking out
plan B at high prices and then get out of the business.

What should be clear is that despite the difference
in shareholders' preferences and views,
plan B will make all of them better off than plan A today.
Their current wealth all increase more
at the current market price.
This has nothing to do with what they want
to do with this new wealth.
In particular, there is no need for any of them
to hold their wealth in the form of the firm's stock
in order to wait to see its future earnings
or bear the risk of the stock or risk a future correction
in the stock price.
These are all decisions on how to invest their current wealth.
They can make whatever choices according
to their own preferences or views
through their own transactions in the market.
These choices are unrelated to the decision
to increase the current market value of the firm.
Therefore, plan B is the right choice for the firm
and also for all its shareholders.
There are a few caveats worth pointing out here.
First, our arguments above rely only
on two assumptions about the financial market.
First, it is well-functioning, meaning accessible to everyone
with no frictions for various transactions.
And second, rich, meaning it's efficient for resource
allocation in time and risk.
It does not necessarily require that market prices
are correct for whatever that means.
In particular, you don't need to agree with the market prices.

Second, it is assumed that the shareholders mainly
care about the financial wealth generated from the firm.
Given that the firm in this case was a family business
to start with and it's still controlled
by the founding family, there might
be other considerations for the shareholders,
such as family name, et cetera.
But these considerations can be addressed
if needed within our framework.
For example, if the family members
want to hold on to the old business,
they can take out plan B to realize its market value
and then sell it through a spinoff, for example.
Third, it's assumed that there is no asymmetric information,
especially between corporate insiders and the market,
nor fake information by the firm.
That is, the market valuation on plan A and B
reflects all the information available in the market.
This is consistent with the efficient market
hypothesis we just discussed in the previous lecture.
In this case, trading by corporate insiders
won't affect the firm's market prices.
