PROFESSOR: In our discussion so far,
we have implicitly assumed that a manager's main objective
in making various decisions is to create
more value for the firm's stakeholders or shareholders.
In particular, in making corporate financial decisions,
the manager's goal is to maximize the current market
value of the firm.
This seems quite intuitive.
But given that this is the starting
point of our analysis of corporate finance,
we would like to give it more careful consideration
before moving ahead with it.
For simplicity, in this part of our analysis,
we assume that the firm is wholly owned
by its shareholders.
Thus, they are the sole stakeholders of the firm.
Such simplification avoids the potential conflicts of interest
where the firm has different stakeholders,
such as bondholders and stockholders.
We will return to these situations
later when we examine a firm's financial decisions where
different stakeholders enter the picture.
Under the notion that the manager should
act in the best interests of the firm's shareholders,
she faces many factors when making a real investment
decision.
Let's consider a few of these factors.
First, each investment has its horizon, namely
a timespan for its cash flow, say, one year, five years,
or longer.
In general, shareholders do care about the timing
of a cash flow.
Should the manager, for example, favor projects with shorter
horizons other things equal?
Next, investments are, in general, risky
and shareholders, on average, risk averse.
How should a manager deal with risk?
Other things equal, say with the same expected payoff,
should the manager always choose projects with lower risks?
How about performance measures like earnings?
Should the manager always favor projects
yielding higher earnings?
How should a manager a balance between near-term earnings
with long-term payoffs?
Firms often give up short-term benefits
to gain long-term returns, such as market share or new markets.
Sometimes, they do so despite the negative reactions
from the market arguing that they
are pursuing long-term value.
Does this make sense?
The list can go on.
But what we hope to show is that with the support
of a well-functioning financial market,
the only reasonable objective for the firm's manager
is to maximize the current market value of the firm.
Here are the reasons.
First, current market value is an unbiased financial
objective.
It is determined and supported by the financial market
and is realizable.
You can realize the value of the project
by simply selling the shares in the market.
Second, current market value incorporates the market value
of all future cash flows properly adjusted
for timing and risk.
Factors like timing and risk are taken
care of by the market valuation through the right discount
rates or cost of capital.
Long-term benefits, if they are recognized by the market,
are also fully included in the expectation of future cash
flows.
Third, current market value is independent of shareholders'
differences.
We're going to elaborate a little bit more on this point.
Again, we start with the notion that a firm's manager
should act to help achieving its shareholders'
financial objectives.
Broadly speaking, shareholders' financial objectives
are two-folded as we have discussed
at the beginning of the course.
First, to increase wealth, that is
to increase the amount of economic resources
at the household's disposal.
This is listed on the slide as objective A.
Second, to deploy the wealth to best meet the household's
economic needs which is to achieve the optimal time
pattern and risk profile for its consumption.
These are listed as objective B and C
respectively on the slide.
It is important to realize that with a well-functioning
financial market, households can achieve objective B
and C through their own transactions in the market.
For example, with a $1 in wealth,
a household can use it for consumption today or deposit it
in the bank account for consumption at any future day.
$1 put it in a bank account gives a safe payoff
in the future, but if the household
wants more payoff when the economy does well,
that is to keep up with the rest of the economy,
like a professor to keep up with his students' future successes,
the $1 should then be put in the stock market.
The household does not need the manager of a firm it invests in
to do any of these.
In fact, it's also impossible for the firm's manager
to worry about these decisions as different shareholders
may have very different financial needs
along these dimensions.
However, there is one dimension they have in common.
It is objective A to have more wealth.
This is where the firm's manager can
help by increasing the firm's current market
value, which goes into a shareholder's wealth.
This is why shareholders invest in the firm in the first place.