
PROFESSOR: We now consider a firm's real investment
or capital budgeting decision.
The decision really boils down to the valuation
of the investment, or the project under consideration.
For simplicity, let's assume that the project
requires an initial investment of $1 million.
And it then yields an expected return,
say, x, over the coming year.
How can we tell if this is a good project?
First, we know that the manager can always
return the cash to the firm's shareholders
in the form of a dividend, for example.
Second, shareholders can easily invest the money
in the financial market.
Suppose that investment opportunities
in the market with similar timing and risk
characteristics as the project offer
an expected rate of return, r.
This then gives us a benchmark to judge the project.
We should take the project only if its expected rate of return,
x, exceeds r.
Otherwise, the shareholders can just take the money
and invest in the market.
Bearing the same risk, they can earn r with no cost and effort.
We have first introduced this idea in the introduction.
We now provide a more formal treatment.
Given an asset or project under evaluation,
we define its opportunity cost of capital
as the expected rate of return offered
by equivalent investments in the financial market,
where equivalent refers to their timing and risk
characteristics.
The reason for this notion is straightforward.
If we are going to invest in the project,
we will forego the return offered
by the similar assets traded in a market, which
is easily available.
It is important to know that the cost of capital
is always associated with an asset or project
under consideration, reflecting the market's expectation
of the return on the asset.
It is not related to factors like the firm's
cost of financing by borrowing or other means.

Given the opportunity Cost Of Capital, sometimes labeled COC,
of a project, the investment decision
becomes straightforward.
If the project yields a return higher than its cost
of capital, we should take it.
Otherwise, we should reject it.
In this case, shareholders will be better off not taking it.
If they are interested in investing assets
with a similar timing and risk characteristics,
they can easily do so in the market
and earn a higher return.
We now formalize this idea a little bit more.
Suppose that the project has the following cash flow.
It requires an initial investment of I today.
It yields a future cash flow, CF1 in one year.
The opportunity cost of capital for the project is r.
What is the value created or destroyed
by taking on this project?
This is given by the net present value, or NPV,
of the project, which is given by the following formula.
The NPV should equal to the initial investment, which
is minus I, plus the expected cash flow, CF1, discounted
at the cost of capital, r.
The decision then becomes straightforward.
Take the project only if its NPV is positive.
The firm's current market value should then
increase by the project's NPV when it is taken or known
to be taken.
For now, we will assume that the project's cost of capital
is given to us.
But from the risk and pricing analysis
we have just developed, we can find
a project's cost of capital or expected rate of return easily.
All we need to do is to find the risk loadings of the project's
return or cash flow.
Then by the arbitrage pricing theory, or APT,
we can determine the project's required rate of return
by the market.
We will return to this part later.