
PROFESSOR: Now let's wrap-up our discussions
on the objectives of the firm's financial manager.
We have three important results.
First, the manager should always maximize
the firm's current market value, which
is independent of shareholders' individual characteristics.
Second, shareholders' financial differences
can be settled in the financial market on their own.
They can utilize the wealth created by the firm
to meet their own consumption, saving,
and investment needs separately independent from the firm's
decisions.
Third with a rich and well-functioning
financial market, sometimes also called a perfect market,
there can be a potential separation between ownership
and management.
As long as the management adheres to value maximization
as the objective, they don't need
to be attached to the shareholders
or their preferences and views.
The actual financial market is not 100% perfect, of course,
although for mature markets, it could be
quite close in many dimensions.
Imperfections can lead to many additional issues.
We only list a few important ones here.
The first point is that a firm may
have different stakeholders, such as bond holders
in addition to stockholders.
Their interests, they will not always be aligned.
In particular, bondholders are mostly
concerned about getting their principal back and interest
paid.
They care more about the downside
of the firm than the upside.
Shareholders, on the other hand, care more
about the upside than the downside.
These differences can influence a firm's financial decisions
under certain circumstances.
Second, with separation of management from ownership,
the management may not always act in the best interest
of the firm's owners.
Instead, they may put their own interests first.
In this situation, management is also
referred to as the agent of the principle, which is the owner.
The conflict of interests is also called the agency problem.
Our three conclusions above depend
critically on the well-functioning financial
market.
In the presence of certain market imperfections,
such as transaction costs, asymmetric information,
and taxes, some of these results will need to be modified.
For now, we will focus on corporate finance decisions
with a perfect financial market.
We will return to the influence of market imperfections
in part two of this course.