
PROFESSOR: We now apply the principles and tools
we have developed to corporate financial decisions.
As we have discussed earlier, corporate decisions
lead to changes on both the asset
and liability side of the balance sheet.
We consider them in turn.
Changes to the asset side come primarily
from the firm's real investments.
These investment decisions are also
referred to as capital budgeting-- that is,
what projects to invest in.
The nature of these projects is very
general, ranging from expanding existing business to mergers
and acquisitions to a marketing plan or an IT upgrade
to new business lines, you name it.
These projects will all add new assets
to the firm, which lead to future cash rolls or earnings.
Changes to the liability side are related
to several financial decisions.
The first is the financing decision,
namely how the firm finances its business or assets.
A firm does so by selling financial assets or claims,
such as taking a bank loan, issuing debt, stock
in other corporate securities.
The second financial decision is payout--
that is, what to pay to the firm's shareholders.
This includes when and how much the firm pays its dividends
or buy back its shares.
Since payout is primarily about servicing the stockholders,
it can also be viewed as part of financing.

The third financial decision is risk management.
Naturally, the firm's business or assets
are exposed to a range of risks.
Some are systematic, and some are
non-systematic or idiosyncratic.
What should the firm do with these risks?
With a rich array of financial contracts traded in a market,
the firm can easily use them to adjust its risk exposures.
Two important questions arise.
First, what risk should the firm keep,
and what risk should the firm unload in the market?
Second, how can the firm achieve a risk management goal
after setting one?
Using the balance sheet of the firm,
we can easily capture these decisions.
The asset side reflects the firm's real investments--
in particular, the fixed assets.
The liability side reflects the firm's financing, payout,
and risk management situations.
As an illustration, let us consider a concrete example.
What is shown on the slide is the balance sheet
of Amazon in 1996 and 1997.
The numbers are in thousand dollars.
In 1996, Amazon's total assets are worth roughly $8.2 million.
Most of them are in cash and securities, about $6.2 million.
Fixed assets are about $1.1 million.
The remaining are inventories and prepaid expenses.
On the liability side, Amazon has $2.8 million
in accounts payable and $2.0 million in accrued expenses.
It had no debt.
The equity is $3.4 million.
The total liability amounts to $8.2 million,
the same as the total asset.

In 1997, Amazon's balance sheet has changed a lot,
increased by about 18 times.
The total assets are now worth $149 million,
with most of it still in liquid assets,
such as cash and securities, for about $125 million in total.
That's an increase of more than 19 times from the year before.
Fixed assets have also increased by about 10 times
to $11.6 million.
On the liability side, Amazon has taken on new debt
to finance its growth.
The debt level has become $78.2 million,
while it was zero the year before.
The equity value has also increased to $28.4 million,
accounts payable, the other big item, at $32.6 million.
Being an online retailer, at least then
this is not surprising.
So is the large cash reserve.
The balance sheet in 1996 and 1997
clearly reflect what Amazon did in 1997.
It issued new equity through its IPO in 1997
and also issued new debt.
The funds raised were used to expand its business,
including substantial investments in fixed assets.

What's shown on this slide is Amazon's balance sheet
at the end of 2018.
By this point, Amazon is already one of the largest company
in the world.
The fixed assets have grown to over $61.7 billion,
while the total assets have grown to $162 billion.
That has also grown to over $23.4 billion
in equity to over $43.5 billion.
These are all in book value.
The market value of Amazon's equity was $773.5 billion
at the end of 2018.
This slide shows Amazon's acquisition
of Whole Foods, a food retail chain, in 2017
at the price of $13.7 billion.
This reflects Amazon's expansion into one of the more
traditional retail markets.
Amazon financed this purchase by issuing $16 billion of bonds.
Clearly, after these transactions,
Amazon's asset site will now have
Whole Foods as its new assets, and its liabilities side
will see an increase of debt by $16 billion.
The difference of $2.3 billion will also end up
on the asset side, of course.
In this course, we will consider corporate finance decisions
in three parts.
The first part is capital budgeting,
which consists of two topics--
first, basic capital budgeting, and two, real options--
that is, strategic optionality embedded in real investments.
The second part is financing or capital structure.
This part consists of three main topics--
first, optimal capital structure, second,
interaction between investments and financing, and third,
payout policy.

The third part is on a firm's risk management strategy
and its implementation.
We will consider basic capital budgeting first
and return to the rest of the corporate finance
topics in part 2 of this course after we have developed
all the tools needed on asset valuation, risk
analysis, and risk management.