
PROFESSOR: Let's consider one more example.
Tang Associates is a mining company which owns a gold mine,
King Solomon's.
It is considering whether to reopen the mine.
We have the following data on the mine.
The mine has a total deposit of 0.11 million ounces of gold.
Extracting the gold takes one year.
It requires initial investment of $86 million.
Gold is currently traded at $800 per ounce,
and the cost of capital for a gold mine is 10%.
Here the cost of capital is given to us,
but can you think of a way to find this number yourself
using the valuation methods we developed
in lectures on risk, and factor models,
and arbitrage pricing theory?
In addition, the current shareholders
are evenly split into two groups--
optimists, who are bullish on gold prices;
and pessimists, who are bearish.
In particular, optimists expect the gold price
to increase 20% next year.
Pessimists expect the gold price to increase only 5%.
Given the difference in their views,
the two groups of shareholders may not
agree on what the firm should do.
For optimists, $1 million, the NPV for reopening the mine,
is minus 86, the production cost,
plus the present value of future gold sales, which
equals 0.11 million ounces of gold, times the gold price now,
which is $800, then times 1 plus the growth
rate of 20%, as they expected.
Finishing the calculation, we have
an NPV of $10 million plus.
By this number, Tang should reopen the mine.

For pessimists, the NPV is computed similarly,
except the growth rate for gold price is expected to be 5%.
So the NPV will be minus 86--
again, production cost, plus the expected future sales
from gold, discounted at the 10% of cost of capital.
If we finish the calculation, we get minus $2 million,
which clearly goes against reopening the mine.
What should the firm or the CFO do?
Some might suggest taking an average over the two numbers.
Why would any of the shareholders agree to this?
Each side believes they are right.
How about I get the optimists to buy out the pessimists?
Interesting idea, but at what price?
Maybe you have more creative ideas
to resolve this disagreement.

Instead of going down further on these paths,
let's take a step back and think it over.
The key issue here is how to value one ounce of gold
next year.
Different shareholders have different views.
Don't blame them.
If the same question was put to us, most likely we won't agree.
But wait a minute.
All we need to know is not about the price of gold next year,
but the present value of one ounce
of gold in one year but today.
A little poking around about the gold market--
a very active market.
We learned the following--
gold, at least those traded in the market,
such as gold bullions and coins, is mostly
held as a long-term investment with no interim payoffs.
It is often viewed as a storage value
or hedge against inflation.
If so, for these gold investors, one ounce of gold of next year
is the same as one ounce of gold today.
If they buy one ounce of gold today, most likely
they will hold it until next year anyway, or even longer.
In the interim, there's no payoff from the gold.
This is different from holding a bond or stock, which
may pay coupons or dividends during the year.
Holding gold incurs little cost either.
Physical gold is mostly stored at gold depositories
with very low cost.
It is the claims on them that change hands when
investors buy and sell them.
We will return to this market later in Part 2,
when we study derivative securities on commodities.
From the above observation, we then
conclude that one ounce of gold in one year
is worth the same amount as one ounce of gold today.
Given that one ounce of gold is trading at $800 now,
the present value of one ounce of gold in one year
is also $800 today.
Immediately, we can conclude that the NPV of reopening
the mine is simply minus 86--
again, the production cost--
plus 0.11 million ounces of gold times the present value
of one ounce of gold in one year, and that's $800.
Finishing that calculation, we get plus $2 million,
which is positive.
This value is the value we can achieve today in the market--
the current price for selling one ounce of gold
delivered next year is $800.
Therefore, by reopening the mine,
the value of Tang Associates will increase immediately
by $2 million, which will make all shareholders richer.
As for the shareholders themselves,
with their own views on future gold prices,
they can use the market to speculate on their forecasts.
For example, for their pessimistic shareholders,
they can sell the shares at a high price now.
If that is not enough, they can even short gold in the market.