
PROFESSOR: When the default barrier is more complicated
and default can occur at any time,
binomial pricing approach is a natural choice.
I'll illustrate that approach with a simplified version
of an analysis I led at the Congressional Budget Office
to determine the value of a loan guarantee made by the US
government to America West Airlines,
or AWA, shortly after 9/11.
At that time, AWA was the eighth largest passenger airline
in the United States but it had already
been experiencing financial difficulties
as had the rest of the industry.
Following 9/11, Moody's downgraded AWA
from B1 in early April of 2001 to CA on November 21, 2001.
Well, to help airlines that had experienced large revenue
drops in the wake of the terrorist attack,
Congress enacted a program to allow airlines
to apply for credit guarantees.
AWA received approval for a government loan guarantee
on $380 million of new debt it planned to issue.
In return, the government received fees and warrants.
My team was asked to calculate the value of the net assistance
provided to AWA and I want to show you that analysis.
The valuation exercise was based on estimates of the key inputs
that are listed here.
The risk-free rate, loan maturity, loan coupon rate,
and rest of the firm capital structure were observable.
Since AWA was publicly traded, data
was available on historical returns that
could be used to estimate its equity beta and equity
volatility.
The default barrier was set to be
similar to the one I just described for the KMV model
based on its liabilities.
The guaranteed debt was pre-payable and because
of the high guarantee fees charged by the government,
it seemed likely that it would be prepaid
if AWA's assets recovered to the point
where it could more inexpensively
borrow on its own.
Rules for pre-payment based on an assumed prepayment barrier
were therefore also incorporated.
As in all Morton style models, a first critical step
is to estimate the initial value of firm assets and asset
volatility.
That first stage was based on using a simple Merton
model with a single debt maturity date.
Sensitivity analysis showed that the results
were fairly stable over a range of plausible assumptions
for the default barrier.
The next step was to represent the returns on assets
as a normally distributed stochastic process
with a constant drift.
That model can be represented in either a physical or
risk-neutral form, the only difference
being the drift term.
In the physical representation, the drift
is the expected risk-adjusted return
on assets minus any payouts.
That representation is useful for analyzing
the true distribution of possible outcomes.
In the risk-neutral representation,
the drift is based on the risk-free rate, also
minus an assumed payout rate.
That representation is used for pricing derivatives
on the asset process, including the loan guarantee,
the warrants received by the government, and the fees paid.
To represent that continuous time process
on a discrete binomial tree with time step,
delta T, the asset process on the up and down nodes
is given by these equations.
Here they're shown for the risk-neutral case.
The drift affects both subsequent nodes the same way
and the addition or subtraction of the volatility term
causes the vertical distance between the two nodes
at the same time to be spaced by 2 standard deviations.
To price the guarantee, the next step
is to identify the nodes where a default will
occur based on comparing the asset value to the default
barrier.
Say a default cause is here and here.
To keep the numerical example simple,
I'm abstracting from the more complicated situation for AWA
and assuming its only liability is a guaranteed zero coupon
bond that has a face value of F.
The guaranteed payout on nodes who are a default occurs
is calculated, weighted by the probability
of reaching that node, and discounted back to time 0.
To attach numbers to the example,
imagine that the guarantee is on a three-year zero coupon
bond with a face value of $900, that the risk-free interest
rate is 5%, and that the risk neutral probability of an up
is 0.5.
The initial asset value is estimated to be $1,000,
and the calibrated tree with the inferred asset
volatility and other assumptions looks like the one pictured
here.
Default occurs at time 3 on the lowest two nodes
because the asset value is less than the $900 face
value of the bond.

This tree shows the payout by the government
on the guarantee on each node where a default occurs.
Discounting back to time 0 implies a guarantee value
of 30.126.
The risky bond value can be found
by calculating its value as if it had no default risk
and subtracting the value of the guarantee.
The calibrated binomial model of AWA's asset value
was used to estimate not only the value of the government
guarantee but also the value of the warrants and guarantee fees
that the firm gave the government in exchange.
This table summarizes the terms of the deal.
Notice that at 8% annually, the guarantee fee
was quite high, although still substantially less
than the credit spread AWA would have faced directly
in the market without a guarantee.
With the guarantee, AWA was able to borrow at a much lower rate
of LIBOR plus 40 basis points.
You may be wondering why, with the guarantee,
the borrowing rate is still higher than the risk-free rate.
That can be attributed to the low liquidity of the debt
and also that investors may believe
that an unforeseen event could cause the guarantee
to be revoked.
The warrants gave the government the right
to purchase 18.8 million shares of stock for $3 per share
after 10 years.
The results of the AWA analysis are summarized here.
The guarantee was estimated to be worth $150.5 million,
more than the sum of the value of the warrants and fees.
Unmet, the present value of the subsidy
was estimated to be $43.7 million.
Note that whereas the loan guarantee had payouts
on the lower branches of the tree,
the valuation of the warrants was
based on their payouts occurring on the upper branches.
The fees were also valued on the tree.
Fee payments were positive on most of the nodes
but zero on some of them.
The possibility of zero fees arose
because the loan was assumed to be prepaid on nodes with a very
high asset value and also because no fees
were paid on nodes where the firm was in default.
A final comment is that this estimate represents the market
value of the net subsidy.
In its official cost estimates, the US government
treats its cost of capital as the risk-free rate,
effectively ignoring the cost of the market risk
it passes through to taxpayers when
it provides credit support.
Under that assumption, the net profit
is estimated to be positive because the warrants are
assessed to be worth more, and the guarantees
are assessed to be worth less than
in this market-based analysis.
