
PROFESSOR: We're now going to turn to standalone
credit derivatives.
Credit derivatives usually involve two counterparties:
a protection buyer and a protection seller.
The payoff depends on the behavior of a reference entity,
for instance whether a guaranteed firm
defaults on its debt.
As with other derivative transactions,
credit derivatives are considered a hedge
when they offset the risk of a cash position.
For example, a commercial bank that lends to Boeing
might buy protection against a default
by Boeing using a credit default swap, which
reduces its net exposure to Boeing credit risk.
If the protection seller has no other exposure to Boeing,
it would be speculation that Boeing
would be unlikely to default over the period covered
by the protection.
A credit default swap provides the protection buyer
with a payment in the event of a default
by a reference entity in exchange
for making a periodic pre-specified payment
to the protection seller.
The periodic fee is a percentage of the notional principle
upon which the insurance is based.
If instead of paying a fee over time,
the value of the protection is entirely paid for up front,
then the contract is usually described
as a guarantee or an option rather than as a swap.
The reference asset or entity could be many things.
It could be a particular loan or the bond of a corporation.
It could be sovereign debt or a portfolio
of risky bonds or even another derivatives contract.
This schematic illustrates the transactions
between the two counterparties.
As you can see from the many details on the slide,
there's a wide variety of CDS structures.
I just want to highlight a few of these points.
A CDS contract always has a fixed maturity
and that need not match the maturity of the reference
entity.
For example, a bank may want protection against default
on a five year loan it's made just for the first year.
And after that, it prefers to take the credit risk
rather than to pay for offloading it.
A critical element of the CDS contract
is a precise description of events that trigger a payout.
The term "default", by itself, is too vague
and standard legal language has evolved
to describe different contingencies.
Because the list of trigger events in the CDS contract
may not include all eventualities that
would cause a firm to experience financial distress,
the contract might offer less than 100% protection.
Importantly, the trigger events must
be observable and verifiable.
Otherwise whether payments are made
can involve a lot of legal complications.
A contract also specifies the type of settlement.
With cash settlement, when there is a default event,
the protection buyer receives the difference between what's
owed and the market value of the reference asset at the time
of the trigger event.
With physical delivery, the protection buyer
delivers the reference asset or assets to the protection seller
and, in return, receives what's owed.
Physical delivery avoids the need
to find a market value when one is not readily available
but it necessitates obtaining and delivering
the asset, which may not be easy or even feasible in some cases.
CDSes that are digitally settled involve a predetermined
fixed payment if there's a trigger event.
An organization that seeks to promulgate standards to ensure
that the CDS market functions smoothly
is called the International Swap Dealers Association or ISDA.
A CDS contract can be based on a single firm or name
as the reference entity.
It can also be written on a basket of multiple firms
or on a broader credit performance index
for various regions.
Index-based CDS are popular because of their liquidity
and ease of obtaining the relevant information
to determine payoffs.
They're collectively referred to as CDX.
CDS and indices are also frequently used as inputs
into structured products such as synthetic collateralized debt
obligations or nth to default bonds.
Those are contracts we'll talk about more next time.
Let's look more closely at the cash flows associated
with a single name CDS and let's assume it's cash settled.
The protection buyer pays a periodic premium called U
on a notional principal amount of protection
for a period of length T, say on $100
face value of the underlying entity's debt.
In the event that the underlying entity
defaults on the debt at some time tau, which
is less than or equal to the maturity date of the contract,
and assuming the recovery amount is
Y of tau for $100 of face value, then the protection buyer
is made whole on the default date
and receives a payment of 100 minus Y of tau.
An analysis of a long-short portfolio
that consists of a risky bond and a risk-free bond
of equal value establishes that the premium rate on a credit
default swap should be approximately
equal to the credit spread on the risky bond.
That's why the principle of no arbitrage.
To see why, let's consider an example that's
illustrated by this diagram.
It shows that the cash flows associated
with a long position in a risk-free bond
with price, P and a short position
in a risky bond with price, P results
in net cash flows that are the same as on a credit default
swap.
Specifically, we assume that both bonds are priced at par
and pay a periodic coupon rate.
s is the dollar credit spread on the risky bond
and r is the dollar risk-free rate.
Assume too that default will only
occur on the maturity date of the bond.
The diagram shows that the net cash
flow of this portfolio each period prior to maturity
is minus s because the r's cancel out.
At maturity, the net payoff is P minus the recovery rate.
Those cash flows are identical to having
a long position in a credit default
swap on the bond with a premium rate equal to s.
Now if the CDS rate, U, is higher than s,
it's an arbitrage opportunity to write a CDS
and create a long-short portfolio that
hedges the associated risk.
Conversely, if the CDS rate, U, were lower than s,
there's an arbitrage opportunity involving
a long position in the CDS, again hedging
with a long-short portfolio.
In practice, there are two main approaches used in CDS pricing.
The first, which is preferred because it's more accurate,
is to price CDS using an extension of the Burton model.
The AWA example can be easily modified, for instance,
to price CDS.
The second approach follows the logic
of the long-short portfolio, no arbitrage pricing,
on the previous slide.
However, there are a number of unrealistic assumptions
that are needed to make that argument rigorous.
And those are mentioned in the bullet points
here in case you're interested in seeing them.
Well, despite a long-short portfolio
not truly being a perfect hedge for a CDS position,
traders often looked for arbitrage opportunities
between the CDS and cash markets by comparing CDS premiums
with the yield spreads in the cash market
and taking positions that will profit
if the pricing between the cash and the CDS market converge.

Multiname CDS is common.
To see why, consider an investor who's
holding a portfolio of defaultable bonds
and wants to buy insurance against default
losses on that portfolio.
The investor could choose between buying
an individual CDS for the bonds in the portfolio
or purchasing insurance on the portfolio overall.
Which do you think is more expensive?
To answer this, think back to our discussion
of exotic options.
In particular, we determined that Asian options that
have a payoff based on average outcomes
are less expensive than otherwise similar options
because averaging or diversification narrows
the variance of outcomes.
A portfolio of bonds diversifies credit risk
relative to individual bond holdings
and buying a CDS based on the default losses on a portfolio
is typically then much less expensive
than buying protection for each individual bond
in the portfolio.
An even less expensive form of protection
is to limit it to events that involve
some large number of defaults.
That can be attractive when an investor
has some tolerance for risk but wants protection
against severe default events such as those that might occur
during a financial crisis.
An n-th to default basket default swap
offers such protection, providing a payoff
only after the n-th default occurs in a basket of reference
securities.
The premium paid for this protection
depends on several factors.
With a larger number of credits in the basket, all else equal,
it's more likely that n will default.
That raises the price of the insurance.
The credit quality and anticipated recovery rates
also influence pricing.
Finally, and also very importantly,
the distribution of the number of defaults
is very sensitive to the pairwise correlation
between the likelihood of default for the reference
entities.
We'll return to the effects of default correlation
and how it affects pricing next week.
This week you've learned a lot about how
statistical and structural models are
used to price credit risk.
We started with a statistical approach,
which derives default and recovery rates from data
on borrower characteristics that include leverage ratios, credit
ratings, tangible collateral, and so forth.
We then turn to structural models,
which infer default and recovery rates based
on the stochastic structure of a borrower's assets
and an assumed default barrier.
Both approaches predict the effect of credit risk
on the value of credit sensitive securities and derivatives.
For defaultable bonds, both should produce similar answers
if they're properly calibrated.
However, I emphasize the structural approach
because it's more flexible and it's much better
suited for pricing more complex credit derivatives.
In practice, hybrids of the two approaches
often produce the most accurate results.
