
PROFESSOR: The Merton model captures
some of the most important drivers of credit risk,
including the volatility of the value of assets
backing an obligation and how leveraged those assets are.
An advantage over a simple statistical approach
is that it links the probability and severity of default events,
and provides a framework to understand
how the cost of credit risk will evolve over time
with market conditions.
Nevertheless, Merton's analytical formulas
rest on strong assumptions that are clearly
violated in practice.
In response, researchers have developed
related models that avoid some of those shortcomings.
Those models are typically solved
numerically and implemented with binomial trees
or using Monte Carlo simulation.
Several of the variations deal with the issue
that firms have complicated capital structures
with a variety of maturities of debt
and that when debt matures, it's typically
rolled over into new debt.
That includes early bankruptcy and stationary leverage.
With early bankruptcy, there is the possibility
of default at any time and default is typically
assumed to be triggered by assets falling
below some default boundary.
Default is still a put option, but now it's
treated as an American option.
The assumption of stationary leverage
is a way of setting a default boundary, which
can be defined in various ways.
Assuming stationary leverage incorporates
the idea that debt tends to be rolled over rather than retired
and, that as asset values change,
leverage may be gradually adjusted towards some target
leverage ratio.
Modeling firm values as unobservable
incorporates the possibility of surprise bankruptcies
due to event risk, such as when embezzlement or fraud
by top managers is revealed.
An example of this was the bankruptcy
of the energy company, Enron that
was rated investment grade when it
failed after dubious accounting practices were revealed.
Technically, such events are often
incorporated with a jump process that periodically causes asset
values to fall discreetly.
Finally, for highly leveraged firms
such as large financial institutions,
interest rate risk can be a driver of bankruptcy
and that can be incorporated as a source of risk.
The KMV model is a widely used extension of the Merton model
that has been commercialized by Moody's.
As in the original Merton model, equity value and equity
volatility, which are inferred from market prices,
are nonlinear functions of the unobservable value
and volatility of firm assets.
The two equations representing those relationships
can be solved simultaneously to infer asset value and asset
volatility given the other inputs.
The main feature distinguishing it from the classic Merton
model is that rather than using the face value of debt
at maturity as a strike price, there's
a default barrier that's based on a firm's observed capital
structure.
That default barrier --
that can be called a "default point" --
is based on a simple proprietary rule.
For example, in an early technical document
they suggested a good rule is that default occurs when assets
fall below 70% of short-term liabilities,
plus half of long-term book liabilities.
The results of the KMV model are summarized by a measure they
call "distance to default".
The distance to default is the number of standard deviations
the estimated market value currently
is away from the default point.

Compared to traditional credit ratings
that fall into discrete buckets, it measures credit risk
as a continuous variable.
The distance to default doesn't directly
reveal the probability of default
because that would require also knowing the imputed volatility
of assets.
Moody's sells a product that maps
distance to default into an expected frequency of default.
As with other Merton style models, simple implementations
of the KMV model underestimate the near-term likelihood
of default because of the assumption
that assets are following a continuous log-normal process.
Incorporating random jumps in asset value that
may be driven by plus on arrival times of low frequency
adverse events, or making the default barrier stochastic
have been shown to improve the performance of this model.