PROFESSOR: In this video, I would
like to provide you with more detail about each
of the courses in the MicroMasters Program
in Finance.
The program consists of five courses, foundations
of modern finance parts one and two, financial accounting,
derivatives markets, and mathematical methods
for quantitative finance.
Learners may begin the program with any of the three entry
point courses.
Entry points into the program are foundations
of modern finance part one, financial accounting,
and mathematical methods for quantitative finance.
Foundations of modern finance is an important topic.
And in this program, we cover it in two courses,
foundations of modern finance part one,
and foundations of modern finance part two.
These two courses together provide
learners with a rigorous introduction
to the fundamentals of modern finance
and their applications to a variety of business decisions,
such as valuations of assets and securities, investment
decisions, risk management, and financing decisions.
We advise our learners to take both of these courses
and take them sequentially, as the second course
builds on the first one.
Financial accounting focuses on how companies provide
financial information to outside stakeholders like stockholders
and creditors.
To understand a company, whether you
are chief executive officer and need
to make key strategic decisions or a hedge fund
manager deciding on whether to invest in a firm,
you must be able to read financial statements.
This course teaches you to analyze and understand them.
For this reason, this course is a required course
in most master of business programs.
Mathematical methods of quantitative finance
provides learners with advanced mathematical topics
in financial engineering and quantitative finance using
linear algebra, optimization, probability,
stochastic processes, and statistics.
You will learn applied computational techniques
frequently used in finance.
Finally, our fifth course, derivatives markets:
advanced modeling, and strategies,
provides learners with economic intuition and technical skills
necessary to understand how to use derivatives for investment
and risk management purposes and how to hedge and price them.
Upon completion of this course, learners
will have a sophisticated understanding
of tools for valuation and for quantifying, hedging,
and speculating on risk.
We recommend that learners take foundations of modern finance
parts one and two as prerequisites
to derivatives markets.
In general, the MicroMasters program in finance
offers many flexible paths to program completion.
Some of the most common roadmaps to program completion
can be found in the "Week 0" material for this course.
Each of the five courses have specific prerequisites.
For example, in order to take foundations of modern finance,
you need to know single variable calculus and linear algebra.
In order to take mathematical methods
for quantitative finance, you need a strong grounding
in probability theory, multivariate calculus,
and linear algebra.
You should also have at least basic familiarity
with programming.
For a complete list of prerequisites for each course,
please visit our website at micromasters.mit.edu/fin.
For your convenience, there is a link right below this video.
Finally, we encourage you to build community
with your fellow learners.
The network you create will benefit you
in this course and beyond.
We also invite you to follow the MIT MicroMasters
Program in Finance on LinkedIn to connect
with us and your fellow learners,
and to stay up to date on all things finance at MIT.
You can find the link to our LinkedIn page below this video.
We're excited to have you join us for this learning journey.
Welcome to the MIT MicroMasters Program in Finance.
