PROF.
JOHN CORE: Now I will give you a brief description
of the structure and content of the course.
This slide shows that the course has
four parts, and details what topics we will cover each week.
In the following slides, I discuss
what we cover in each part.
The introductory part A provides an overview of accounting,
why it is important, and how we account
for various transactions.
These individual transactions add up
to become the three major financial statements, which
are the income statement, the balance sheet, and the cash
flow statement.
In this part we examine the building blocks
of accounting, which are accrual accounting and revenue
recognition.
We apply these ideas to understand accounting
for five major assets on the balance sheet:
receivables, inventories, property, plant and equipment,
also known as PPE, intangible assets, and investments
in other companies.
We illustrate these issues with case studies of Amazon, AT&T,
Hertz, and other companies.
In this part, we also analyze the cash flow statement
and understand how it relates to the income statement.
In part B, we do an application, which is financial statement
analysis or FSA.
We use FSA to compare companies, and we
will learn ratios that compare companies
based on bankruptcy risk, profitability, and efficiency.
We illustrate these ratios using a case
study of the financial statements of Amazon
and Walmart.
These ratios are widely used by lenders
to help them decide how to price a loan,
and by equity investors in screening potential stock
investments.
In addition, the ratios are widely
used in compensation plans.
In part C, we examine liabilities and stockholders'
equity, with a particular focus on financing through debt,
leases, and stock.
We begin by studying the accounting
for income taxes using examples from Goldman Sachs'
financial statements.
We then examine the accounting for debt financing
through the sale of bonds, and the accounting
for quasi debt financing through lease transactions.
We next study equity, or stock financing,
and the accounting for stock repurchases, dividends,
and stock splits using examples from AT&T's and Tesla's
financial statements.
We study earnings per share, or EPS,
using Twitter's financial statements as an example.
For most of the course, we focus on accounting
for industrial companies like AT&T and Tesla,
and retail companies like Amazon.
In our last session, we study banks and their more
specialized accounting.
In doing this, we review the accounting for investments
and we review the accounting for bad debt expense, which
in essence is the same as the accounting for loan
losses at banks.
In the final Part D, we do an extensive study of Tesla's 2019
financial statements.
Part of this study provides a review of prior material
to help you prepare for the final.
It will also introduce you to how
to use the financial statements to gather information
for valuing companies.
I will be working together with you throughout this course,
and I hope you will enjoy it.