PROFESSOR: Now, let's return to the basic valuation problem.
In example one, we considered a safe cash flow.
What if it's risky?
We can apply the same idea.
Suppose that we're looking at an asset that yields a risky cash
flow in one year of an expected a value of $1,000.
How much is it worth today?
Again, we'll look into the financial market.
Suppose that assets traded in the financial market
with the same timing and risk offer
an expected return of 10%.
Assets like this could be stocks of similar risks.

With that information, let's think
about a potential buyer of the asset under consideration.
She would also expect an annual return of 10%
because she is bearing the same on the risk.
Let the price of this risky asset be x.
And again, x times 1 plus 10%, the expected return
on this kind of assets, should equal to $1,000.
That's the expected payoff from this asset.
This will gives us the current market value for this asset
to be $1,000 divided by 1 plus 10%, the expected
rate of return.
This gives us $909.
This should be the current market
value for this risky cash flow of $1,000 in one year.
Summarizing what we have learned from the two examples,
we arrive at the following three important results.
First, in the well-functioning, meaning frictionless,
financial market, there should be no arbitrage opportunities.
This is also referred to as the no arbitrage condition
for the financial market, a key idea in no analysis.
This is simply because in absence
of any cause or restrictions, any arbitrage opportunity
will be eliminated quickly, often instantaneously,
by investors choice to take advantage of them.
In reality, however, there could be
frictions in the market such as transaction costs, trading
constraints, information asymmetry.
These frictions can hinder the workings of market forces.
For example, you may see prices in the market which
seem to allow arbitrage, but various costs
can prevent the actual arbitrage trades from being profitable.
In this case, we make three observations.
First, strictly speaking, these are not
to arbitrage opportunities.
In the presence of frictions such as trading costs,
we also need to include these costs in defining an arbitrage.
Two, the extent that frictions are not very severe,
at least for some market participants, the no arbitrage
conditions should still hold pretty well at least
as a first order approximation.
Three, if we see substantial and persistent violations
of no arbitrage condition, they are usually not
sustainable because investors will eventually
find ways to overcome the frictions
and take advantage of the arbitrage opportunity.
We will return to these points later in this lecture.
We should also point out that we don't
need all market participants to face limited frictions.
It is sufficient if only some of them do.

Second, from the no arbitrage condition,
we can also conclude that assets with the same payoffs
should have the same prices.
This is also called the Law of One Price.
Obviously, violations of Law of One Price or LOP
also violate the no arbitrage condition.
You may have seen LOP in other economic contexts
like international trade.
The difference is that in a mature financial market,
it actually works pretty well.
The reason is, again, that in the financial market,
frictions are much less significant.
Third, with the rich and well-functioning
financial market, all assets can be valued or priced
by the market or the prices of traded assets.
Here, rich means that there is a large set
of traded assets with cash flows covering the whole range
in time and risk.
We'll be more specific about this point
in our later discussions.
For now, it is sufficient to point out
that in the global financial market,
there are tens if not hundreds of thousands
of primary financial securities, such as bonds, stocks,
and asset backed securities traded in very liquid markets,
not to mention our limited number of derivative securities
and financial contracts.
The financial market is indeed a rich and fast expanding
universe.
We will return to this topic soon.