
PROFESSOR: We have now defined what
finance is about and the two basic problems in finance.
One, how to value assets and two,
how to maximize wealth and utilize it to best meet
our economic needs.
In the remainder of this course, we will tackle these problems
in a wide range of contexts using the basic ideas
and analytical framework we have laid down.
In doing so, we will be applying a few simple principles,
which we now describe.
Principle number one-- there's no free lunch
in the financial market.
As we have seen that the idea behind this principle
is quite simple--
any free lunch, if it appears, will be taken advantage
of by some market participants, which will then
eliminate the free lunch.
With the efficiency of the financial market,
which means that investors-- at least some of them--
can trade or create financial assets
easily in the market in large quantities.
Such a process happened very quickly.
It is important to know that the same cannot be said for other
markets, such as the goods market or the labor market.

Principle number two-- other things
equal, individuals or market participants behave as follows.
One, prefer more money to less.
This is sometimes also caught non-satiation.
Two, prefer to avoid risk.
This is also called risk aversion.
Three, prefer money now to later.
This is sometimes also called impatience.
More is better than less should be obvious.
Risk aversion is easy to understand,
and we will discuss it further when
we do our risk analysis later.
Impatience is less obvious, but also less important
for most of our analysis.
It's listed here mostly for completeness.
In fact, as we have said, all we can and need to say
is that the market on average behaves this way.
This behavior is consistent with the return and risk
patterns for various asset classes
with different timing and risk characteristics, which we will
see from the data later on.
There is no reason nor need to assume
that everyone behaves this way.
Principal number three-- financial market prices
shift to equate supply and demand.
In economics, this is also called a market equilibrium.
Given the strong market forces in the well-functioning
financial market, prices quickly adjust to market equilibrium.
We have already seen an example of this
in the case of price reactions to dividend announcements.
Principal number four, market imperfections
are central to financial innovation.
Real markets do have imperfections
in different forms and to different x degrees.
They do cause inefficiencies in the market--
for example, price deviations from no arbitrage
relationships.
These deviations also represent potential profit opportunities.
Financial innovations to overcome the imperfections
in the market lead to the realization
of these profits and their eventual disappearance.
We will see plenty of examples of various innovations
in different situations.