PROFESSOR: From our discussion so far,
we have arrived at two basic conclusions.
First, business decisions boil down to how to value assets.
And two, asset valuation is determined
by the financial market.
Therefore, the financial market is playing
a central role in the economy.
It is where asset prices are determined
which are guiding the decisions of firms and households
at the micro level and the allocation of resources
across different economic activities at the macro level.
For this reason, we will spend a large part of the course
to study the financial market.
Before now, we would like to take a broad perspective
on the fundamental functions of the financial market
in economy.
Generally speaking, an economy consists of three markets--
the labor market, the product market,
and the financial market, broadly
defined which also includes financial intermediaries.
The first two markets are sometimes also referred to
as the real economy.
The end players in these markets are households
and non-financial firms.
Financial firms are typically included
as part of the broad financial market,
therefore going forward what we call firms will typically
refer to non-financial firms just for simplicity.
Firms and households participate in the labor and product market
to produce and to consume goods and services.
In order to do so, they need the financial market.
For example, they all rely on the payment system
to exchange goods and services.
Firms often need to take out loans or issue bonds and stocks
to raise funds for its production process.
Households often need to borrow money
from banks for current consumption
or save money for future consumption.
These services are all provided by the financial market.
It is through these financial services
and the key role of asset prices in guiding economic decisions
and resource allocation that financial market is driving
the economic activities.
Therefore, the effective financial market
is the foundation of a modern economy.
It is at the center of the economic universe.

Let's now take a quick look at the general structure
of the financial market.
Roughly speaking, it consists of two parts.
One, securities market where financial assets
are traded more directly, and two, financial intermediaries
where financial assets or contracts are
traded more indirectly.
Examples of major financial intermediaries
include commercial banks, investment banks, mutual funds,
and insurance companies.
We can look at the financial market in slight more detail.
The securities market consist of a large array
of financial assets or contracts.
They are roughly categorized by the timing and risk
of their payoffs or cash flows.
The first category is the money market.
It consists of short-term debt securities
issued by governments, banks, and corporations
such as Treasury Bills, CDs, and commercial papers.
These securities have relatively short maturities, no more
than a year, and low risks.
The next category is the capital market
which consists of securities with longer
maturities and higher risks.
It can be further divided into two parts, bonds and stocks,
with increasing maturity and risk.
The third category is the derivative securities market
which includes forwards and futures, swaps, and options.
We will examine each of these market in more detail later.
Financial intermediaries are institutions
who mediate financial transactions
among firms and households.
They mostly own financial assets.
Prominent examples of financial intermediaries
include commercial banks, insurance companies, savings
and loans, as well as mutual funds, hedge funds, investment
banks, private equity funds.
The end user of securities market
in financial intermediaries are non-financial firms,
households, and governments.
Non-financial firms own mostly real assets
while households and governments own
both real and financial assets.