
PROFESSOR: The idea of no free lunch
is essential in asset valuation.
Thus, we will develop it a bit more formally.
A free lunch, or an arbitrage opportunity
in the financial market, is a set
of trades based only market information, such
that it meets three conditions.
First, it requires non-positive initial investment.
The initial investment could be negative,
meaning a cash inflow.
Two, it yields non-negative future payoffs,
at least with some likelihood.
Third, at least one of the above inequalities is strict.
It is important to emphasize that these trades are based
on market information only.
They do not rely on any private information.
Therefore, if they do exist, they
will be available to everybody participating in a market.

Let's now consider a simple example
of an arbitrage opportunity.
Suppose that Citibank, a large commercial bank,
offers a 12 month lending rate of 1%.
Chase, another large commercial bank,
is selling 12 month certificates of deposit, also called a CD,
at an interest rate of 1.125%, assuming no default risk
on Chase CDs.
These two prices then present an arbitrage opportunity.
Let's consider the following set of trades.
First, borrow money from Citibank,
say $100, at the interest rate of 1%.
Buy $100 of CD from Chase at 1.125% interest rate.
The current cash flow in net is zero.
We don't need to put in any money.
In one year we will receive $101.125 from Chase,
earning the 1.125% interest.
After paying 101 to Citi, with 1% interest,
we are left with $0.125 for sure.
This is a free lunch.
If so, we'll do more than $100.
How about $100 million?
Well, in that case, the arbitrage profit
would be $125,000.
How about more?
Well, as we keep borrowing money from Citi,
it will eventually raise its lending rate above 1%.
As we buy more CDs from Chase, it
will start lowering the CD rate below 1.125%.
Soon, the rates converge, the arbitrage opportunity
disappears, and the market stabilizes.
Now let's consider another example.
Suppose that IBM shares are traded on the New York Stock
Exchange, or NYSE, at $195 per share.
And they are also traded on London Stock Exchange, or LSE.
At 120 pounds per share.
And the pound dollar exchange rate is $1.50 for a pound.
In absence of any frictions, this situation
also provides an arbitrage opportunity.
Let's consider the following set of trades.
Sell one share of IBM on NYSE, yielding $195.
Converting the $195 into pounds, at $1.50 per pound,
that's going to give us 130 pounds.
Buying one share of IBM on LSE, costing 120 pounds, in net,
we are left with 10 pounds today with zero net cash
roll in the future.
One share sold in New York is offset by the one
share bought in London.
Clearly this is an arbitrage.
Giving us 10 pounds today with no future cash flows.
Of course, as we carry out these arbitrage trades
at large quantities, the IBM share price on NYSE
will decrease, as we're selling IBM shares there,
and its price on LSE will increase until the arbitrage
opportunity disappears.
Such a process, as you can imagine,
happens almost instantaneously with automated trading
these days.
Therefore, as a good first order approximation,
there should be no arbitrage opportunities in the well
functioning financial market.