
PROFESSOR: We now turn our attention
to the valuation of assets.
The asset can be a real asset like an investment project
or a financial asset like a bond or stock.
Each asset is fully defined by its future cash flow.
Its cash flow can have many pieces occurring
at different points in time from time 0, which is today,
to times 1, 2, et cetera.
To be concrete, we can describe an asset's cash flow
in the table, listing each piece of outflow and inflow
over the asset's lifespan.
Let the initial cash flow be CF0,
which can be negative in the case of initial investment.
The cash flow in year 1 be CF1 and so on.
The valuation of an asset is then
equivalent to the valuation of its cash flow.
For convenience, sometimes we also
draw a flow chart to describe a cash flow
as shown in the figure here like what we
did in our beginning example.
Again, a downward arrow represents a cash outflow,
while an upward arrow represents a cash inflow.
When we consider a cash flow, other than its magnitude,
it has two important characteristics.
The first is time.
Let's now consider two cash flows
in the first example on the slide,
$1,000 today and $1,000 next year.
They have the same magnitude but arrive at different times.
Which one would you prefer?
In general, people are not indifferent between these two
cash flows.
The fact that market interest rates are typically positive
suggest that market participants on average
prefers $1,000 today over later.
We will return to this topic later.
But for the moment, the point we want to establish
is simply that the timing of a cash flow matters.
How much it matters is what we refer
to as the time value of money.
The second important characteristic of a cash flow
is its risk.
To see this, let's consider the two cash flows
in the second example on the slide.
Cash flow one on the left-hand side is $1,000 for sure.
There's no uncertainty here.
Cash flow two, which is on the right-hand side,
will be $2,000 or $0 with equal chances.
The expected value of this cash flow
is still 1,000, same as the first one.
But it is risky.

Which one of these two cash flows would you prefer?
Different people may have different preferences.
In the market often, cash flow two, which is risky,
will be selling for a lower price than cash flow one.
We will spend more time to understand this difference
later.
But for now, the key point for us
is that the uncertainty or risk of a cash flow
matters for its valuation.
How much it matters is often called the risk premium.

Therefore, we conclude that time and risk
are the two key elements in finance
because they are critical in the valuation of assets.
How can we value or price a cash flow on an asset then?
We will devote a lot of time to develop
a set of tools and techniques to help us solving this problem.
For now, we will use a couple of simple examples
to illustrate the key idea behind our general approach.
Let's consider an asset which yields a cash flow in one
year of a sure value of $1,000.
How much is it worth today?
In order to have an objective valuation,
we can look into the financial market for similar assets
and their prices.

Suppose that assets or cash flows
traded in the financial market with the same timing and risk
offer a return of 5%.
A good example of these assets would be one year US government
bonds.

The prices of these bonds then will give us
a market-based valuation for the cash flow
that we would like to value.
Let's think about the following.
A potential buyer of the asset also
expects a sure return of 5%, the same as what the one year
US government bonds offer.
Let the price of the asset we like to value be x.
Then x times 1 plus the expected 5% of return
should equal to the payoff in one year, which is the $1,000.
Solving for x, the current price gives us 1,000 divide by 1
plus 5%, and that is $952.
This gives us the assets current market value.
What if the asset can be traded at a higher price, say 960?
This will then lead to what we call a free lunch.
Let's consider the following set of trades.

First, buy $952 worth of one-year US treasury
bonds, which will pay $1,000 in one year
at a 5% interest rate, the same as the asset.
Next, we sell this sure cash flow
of $1,000 in one year for $960 today.
These two trades will net a positive cash flow today,
which is 960 minus 952.
That equals $8.
There will be no future cash flows.
This is a free lunch, a no-risk profitable opportunity.
Naturally, free lunches will be eaten very quickly
in the effective financial market.
In particular, sophisticated market participants
will make these trades at large quantities
until the price deviation disappears.

Therefore, if there are no frictions, that
is, hurdles preventing free lunches to be taken,
such as trading costs and constrains,
the price of the asset can't be higher than $952.
What if the price of this cash flow is below $952?
Or in this case, we will also have a free lunch.
All we have to do is to reverse the trades we
did in the previous situation.
I will leave that as an exercise for you.
To summarize, given the prices of similar assets traded
in the market, the price of a sure cash flow
of $1,000 in one year must be exactly
$952, not higher, not lower.
This example gives us the key idea in asset valuation.
In order to value an asset, we can find a traded asset
with the same cash flow in the market.
The price of the traded asset then
should give the current market value of the asset
under consideration.
The logic behind this idea comes from the fact
that an effective financial market should not
allow free lunches.