
PROFESSOR: When we think about finance, what comes to mind
may include bank accounts, stock market, mortgages,
mutual funds, hedge funds, derivative securities,
venture capital, private equity, and IPOs.
Of course, these are all parts of finance--
financial products, services, markets, and institutions.
But in fact, finance is a lot more important and fundamental
to our economy and our welfare.
It is really about how to make the best economic decisions
or how to best utilize the limited resources we have
to meet our economic needs.
We would like to illustrate this point with an example.
Suppose that you are a marketing manager at a company.
You are thinking about a new marketing campaign
for your existing product line.
Independent of the details of the plan,
being online or through regular media,
the ultimate goal is to increase future profit
from increasing sales.
Of course, the plan could cost some money.
Let's assume that the cost of the whole marketing plan
is $10 million today.
If launched, you will increase the firm's profit
from new sales by $12 million next year for sure.
To keep things simple, let's assume
this is the only benefit from this marketing plan.
The overall cash flow for their marketing plan,
which we also refer to as a project using a more generic
term, is given in the chart.
A downward arrow represents a cash outflow--
a negative cash flow.
And an upward arrow represents a cash inflow, a positive cash
flow.
Your decision is whether to launch this project.
How do you make this decision?
It would be too simplistic to simply say,
our net profit is 12 minus 10.
That's $2 million.
Thus, this is a good deal.
This is because $12 million in new profits is next year and it
cannot be simply net with the $10 million of cost today.
They are money at different points in time,
thus cannot be compared directly.
But how should we compare them then?
We can also view this as an investment,
investing $10 million today and returning $12 million
next year, yielding a sure return of 20%.
Is a return of 20% a good deal?
Maybe.
Maybe not.
It depends.
In absence of other information, answers to these questions
may become a subjective judgment.
However, suppose now we know that one year bank
deposits offer a sure interest rate of 5%.
Then we can answer this question easily.
Clearly, the project offers a good deal.
It gives us a sure return of 20%, which
is much higher than one can get from other investment
opportunities in the financial market,
such as bank deposits, which are easily available to everyone.
Thus by taking on this project, we are earning higher returns
and thus creating value for the shareholders
and the society at large.
What if the interest rate in a market is 25%?
Then clearly, this is not a good project.
Shareholders can easily invest their money
in a market to earn 25%, which is higher than the return
the project gives.
Investing in the project would be destroying value
rather than creating value.
In the scenario above, label A in the graph,
we only need to value a single cash flow, $12 million
for sure in one year.
How about if the $12 million is spread over the next three
years, $4 million each year, shown
in the plot as scenario B?
In this case, we need to know how
to value cash flows in different points in time.
Given that the cash flow arrives in the future, most likely
they are uncertain.
This is in arrow C, in which $4 million each year only
represents our forecast of the cash flow.
Its realization is uncertain.
It can be lower or higher than $4 million.
This is reflected also by the lighter blue color we
use to describe the cash flow.
In this case, the assessment of the project
further requires us to know how to value risky cash
flows in the future.
This example leads to two key conclusions.
First, a business decision-- in this case, a marketing
campaign-- ultimately is about how
to value a project or its cash flows.
This is fundamentally a finance problem.
Second, the valuation is not a subjective exercise,
but determined by the financial market.
Of course, what we call a project
can be any business activity.
It can be a marketing campaign, like the example.
It can also be an expansion of the current product line,
an R&D initiative, an acquisition
of another business, an upgrade of the current IT system,
the reorganization of existing workforce, and so on.
So finance is the basic tool we need to value these activities
and to make sound decisions.
The previous example illustrates the fundamental importance
of finance in economic decision making.
It is about the bottom line of any business activity.
More generally, a business activity
involves acquiring and disposing assets.
Here, an asset refers to anything and everything
that is of economic value.
Its shape and form can be very generic.
It can be a real asset, like a plant and machinery,
or a financial asset, like cash and bonds.
It can be tangible, like land and stocks,
or intangible, like brand name, goodwill, and ideas.
All business activities serve two basic economic functions.
One, to grow wealth or create value, and two,
to manage existing wealth to best meet future economic needs
as shown by the previous example we have just discussed.
Therefore, a business decision starts
with the valuation of assets.
You can't create and manage what you can't measure.
Value is an objective measure.
It is determined by the financial market.
Valuation is the central issue of finance and business
decision making.
So the questions we would like to answer in this course
are as follows.
First, how to value assets.
As we've seen, all business decision makings
first require the proper valuation
of the assets involved.
Second, how should firms make sound financial decisions?
For example, what projects to invest in?
That's sometimes also called capital budgeting
or real investment decisions.
How to finance a project--
that's a financing decision by either issuing financial claims
or securities, such as loans, bonds, and stocks.
Third, what to pay to shareholders.
That's often referred to as pay out policy.
And also, what risk to take on or to avoid.
And that's sometimes also referred to as risk management.
And third, how should households make financial decisions?
We will address these questions by developing and applying
a unified analytical framework and a set of basic finance
principles.