PROFESSOR: Finally, we want to summarize
the basic economic functions of the financial market.
First, it allows market participants
to allocate resources to best meet the economic needs.
The allocation is in two dimensions across time
and across different states of the economy.
Let's consider two simple examples as an illustration.
The first is allocation across time.
A good example here will be a household
borrow money to buy a home.
In this case, the household is moving future resources,
like future income, to finance current housing consumption.
The second example is allocation across different states
of the economy.
Here, we can think of a household investing
in stocks or bonds.
Here, depending on where the household
is going to allocate its wealth, it's
actually shifting its wealth towards or away
from good states of economy.
Second, the financial market provides a powerful mechanism
to determine asset prices based on current information.
This function is also referred to as price discovery.
In order to illustrate the price discovery
process in the financial market, let's consider an example.
What is shown in the left figure is a stock's price reaction
in the US market when the firm announces
a decrease in its dividend.
The x-axis is time.
The point marked by AD is the announcement date.
To its left are the dates before the announcement minus 3
is three days before, and minus 10 is 10 days before.
To the right are the days after the announcement.
2 is 2 days after the announcement and 10
is 10 days after.
The y-axis yes the stock price change in percentage.
A decrease in dividend is typically
viewed as bad news for the company.
We will return to the question of why when we discuss
corporate finance issues later.

Therefore, the stock price drops substantially for about 4.6%
on average on the announcement day.
There's nothing necessarily surprising about this.
What is surprising however, is that the price drops
to the right level, that is by minus 4.6%, almost immediately.
This shows the market is incredibly
efficient in figuring out what the implication
of the negative dividend news for the firm
and in discovering the right new stock price.

The figure on the right-hand side
shows the stock price adjustment in response
to announcements on dividend increases.
In this case, the stock price increases by about 1%.
Again, it reaches this level very quickly.

This example demonstrates how the financial market
facilitates the formation of asset prices
in reflecting new information on relevant economic fundamentals.
We will return to this issue later
when we discuss the information or efficiency
of the financial market.
In our discussion of the financial market
and its role in asset valuation, we
mentioned that a well-functioning market
should be absent of frictions.
Before moving on with this notion,
we should have some clarification about it.
Market frictions, also called market imperfections,
typically referred to the following.
The first kind of market frictions is transaction costs.
They can come in different shapes and forms.
For example, markets may be missing for certain assets.
That means the cost of trading these assets is prohibitively
high.
Some markets may be there, but it's
costly to access them to participate in these markets.
When we can trade in a market, we
may also have to pay trading costs which
may include commissions, bid ask spreads, and so on.
In some markets, we also face position or trading
constraints.
For example, there might be limits on how large a position
we can take.
The second kind of market frictions
involve information asymmetry.
This could be information asymmetry
between a firm's different stakeholders,
like bondholders and stockholders.
It could be information and symmetry
between corporate managers and the financial market
or between different market participants.
The third kind of market frictions are taxes.
They include corporate taxes and personal taxes.
Our analysis always starts with a financial market
without frictions as the benchmark.
Actual markets do have frictions which will be considered
when needed.