
PROFESSOR: Economic decisions boil
down to the transformation of assets or economic resources
in general we will start our analysis by first describing
the existing assets of an economic decision maker, which
can be a firm or a household.
To begin, let's first focus on a firm.
A description of the firm's assets
it's also referred to as part of its balance sheet.
The table on a slide illustrates a simple balance sheet.
The left-hand side lists all the assets of the firm.
It can contain cash, the most liquid asset, capital,
the other tangible assets, and then intangible assets.
Adding up the value of the firm's assets
gives the firm's total value as shown
by the bottom row in the table.
It's often the case that the firm does not
solely on its assets.
For example, part of the assets may
be financed by borrowing, in which case
the lenders also have some claim on the firm's assets.
Thus, the right-hand side of the balance sheet
is used to describe the firm's liabilities,
namely claims on the firm's assets.
In the simple case we show here, the liabilities
consist of two parts, debt, denoted by D,
and equity, denoted by E. D represents the lender's claim
on the firm's assets, while E represents the equity holders'
claim both in the form of their market value.
Of course, if we add up all the liabilities, that
is all the claims on the firm, it
must equal all of the firm's assets or their total value.
Thus, the total value of all assets
must equal to the total value of all the liabilities.
We can call this the conservation of value.
Balance sheet properly describes a firm's
current financial status.
Of course, a firm's economic or financial status
does not stay constant.
It evolves over time.
This evolution is driven by the firm's flow of funds.
This flow is described by the firm's income statement.
The income statement also has two parts, the source of funds
and the use of funds.
Of course, the two must be equal.
We can also call this the conservation of funds or money.
For the source of funds, there are three parts,
funds generated by the existing assets,
such as earnings or interest from cash assets.
We denote this by net income or NI.
Funds raised by issuing new debt,
such as new loans or bonds, we denote this by delta D.
The third source of funds come from issuing new equity.
We denote this by delta E. For the use of funds,
there are four parts.
The first part is investments into new projects, denoted
by I. The second part is the coupon
interest or principal payments on existing debt, denoted by C.
The third part is the dividend payment to shareholders,
denoted by Div.
And the last part is taxes paid to tax authorities, which
we denote by T.
Given the flow of funds, the firm's balance sheet
changes over time.
On the asset side, new investments
will add to capital and possibly other items, too.
On the liability side, new debt and equity issues
add to existing debt and equity, respectively.
Let's now consider a firm's financial decisions, which
are illustrated in the graph.
On the firm's manager, the left-hand side box
represents the firm's business operations.
The right-hand side box represents
the financial market.
As far as the firm's bottom line is concerned,
the manager's decisions lead to the falling five cash flows.
Cash flow one-- funds raised from investors
by selling financial claims, delta D and delta E. Cash flow
two represents funds invested in the firm's
operations or real assets, which is denoted by I.
Cash flow three represents funds generated
by the firm's operations.
It should be after tax.
So that should equal to NI, the Net Income, minus taxes.
The fourth cash flow, cash flow four
gives funds return to investors in the form of interests
and dividends.
We denote that by C plus Div.
Cash flow five gives funds retained
for the firm's operations.
And that should equal to Net Income, NI, minus Taxes, T,
minus coupon payments minus dividend payments.
Thus, managerial decisions really
reduce to the management of four cash flows, cash flow one, two,
four, and five.
The first set of decisions about real investments
or capital budgeting, this is shown
by the left-hand side of the plot
involving cash flow two and three.
As we have seen before, how to make these real investment
decisions really boils down to valuation of real assets.
The second set of decisions involve financing and pay out
decisions, as shown by the right-hand side
of the plot involving cash flow one, four, and five.
Of course, in order to make good decisions on these activities,
we would need to know how to value financial assets.
The third set of decisions are risk management decisions
associated with cash flow one and four.
And that involves transactions between the firm
and the financial market.
And of course, in order to make these risk management
decisions, we would need to know how
to value financial contracts.
The objective for the manager is to create maximum value
for shareholders.
The right decisions in achieving this goal critically
rely on how to correctly value assets, real and financial.
We can use the same method to analyze
a household's financial decisions,
also shown in the graph.
The left-hand side box represents
the household's real economic activities,
such as working, private business,
or investing in human capital, like education.
The right-hand side box represents the financial market
and the financial institutions a household interacts with.
Financially, the household's decisions
lead to the following five cash flows.
Cash flow one-- funds raised from financial institutions
or from holdings in financial assets,
such as borrowing from a bank or selling the house stock
holdings.
Cash flow two represents funds or resources
invested in real assets.
Cash flow three describes funds or assets
generated by real assets.
Cash flow four gives funds returned
to financial institutions or invested in financial assets.
And the last piece, cash flow five,
describes funds and resources consumed by the household
or saved for future consumption.
Therefore, a household's financial decisions really
reduce to the management of four cash flows, cash flow one, two,
four, and five in the graph.
Again, they represent three sets of decisions,
real investments shown by the left-hand side involving cash
flow two and three.
Making these decisions involves valuing real assets.
Second set of decisions represent consumption, saving,
and investment, as shown by the right-hand side
of the graph involving cash flow one, four, and five.
Of course, these decisions rely on valuing financial assets
and how to best use them.
The third set of decisions are risk management decisions
involving cash flow one and four.
And these decisions critically rely on the valuation
of financial contracts.
The objective for a household is to maximize lifetime happiness
or welfare, or sometimes we call it utility.
How to achieve this goal relies on how
to value assets, real or financial,
and how to best deploy them to meet economic needs.
