PROFESSOR: This week, we continue our exploration
of option pricing.
We developed the risk-neutral pricing method,
which is a powerful and widely used
approach to option valuation.
We applied this framework to pricing of exotic options.
We also derived the Black-Scholes-Merton option
pricing model and discussed its empirical implementation.
In this section, we introduced the risk-neutral approach
to option pricing.
Risk-neutral valuation method was introduced in the 1970s
by John Cox and Stephen Ross.
We start with the binomial model in its general form.
Stock price follows a binomial process rising by multiple of u
or falling by a multiple of d over the next period.
The risk-free interest rate is equal to r.
To avoid arbitrage, we assume that the stock
return and the bond return do not dominate each other.
In the up node, the stock performs better than the bond.
And in the down node, the bond outperforms the stock.
Formally, we impose the restriction
that u exceeds 1 plus r, which is greater than d.
Consider an option on the stock.
To be specific, let it be a call option with a strike
price of k.
Its payoff is a function of the stock price at expiration.
It's the maximum of 0 and the difference between the stock
price and the strike.
As we did in our numerical example,
we priced the option by replication.
We form a replicating portfolio with delta shares
of the stock and B dollars in the riskless bond.
We require that the value of the replicating portfolio
matches the value of the option at each node next period.
This imposes two restrictions on delta and B.
We find a unique solution for the composition
of the replicating portfolio.
We then expressed the option price at time 0
as the initial value of the replicating portfolio.
Recall that this follows from the law of one price.
The option and its replicating portfolio
have the same payoff next period in each state.
Therefore, they must trade at the same current price.
Next, we rewrite the expression for the option price
to reveal the risk-neutral pricing formula.
First, define two numbers, q sub u and q sub d,
in relation to stock returns in the up and down nodes
and the risk-free rate.
Note that according to our definition,
these two numbers are positive and sum up to 1.
Because of that, we can interpret these numbers
as probabilities for the up and down states
on the binomial tree.
From here on, we will use q to denote the probability
corresponding to the up node, and then 1 minus q corresponds
to the down node.
We now return to our general expression for the option price
and rewrite it using the q probabilities.
We find that the option price at time 0
is equal to the expected value of the options payoff
using q probabilities discounted at the risk-free rate.
q probabilities are called the risk-neutral probabilities.
The reason for this name is that we are discounting the expected
payoff on the q probabilities at the risk-free rate.
This is how the discounted cash flow formula would look
if investors were risk neutral.
Keep in mind that q probabilities are
a convenient mathematical construct,
and our interpretation of these numbers in relation
to risk neutrality is an intuitive analogy,
but we do not impose any restrictions
on investors' preferences.
We do not know how risk averse investors are,
and we do not need to know that.
Our pricing results are based entirely
on arbitrage arguments.
Risk-neutral pricing may seem like a bit
of mathematical magic.
We derive the option pricing formula
using the law of one price and the dynamic replication
argument.
Then, at the very end, we rewrite the valuation formula
using risk-neutral probabilities.
Why is this possible?
To gain some intuition, let's start with the knowledge
that the payoff of any option can be replicated by trading
in the stock and the bond.
We will not use the exact option pricing formula, only
the notion that replication is possible.
Change the probabilities of the up/down stock price
changes so that the expected return of the stock
becomes equal to the risk-free rate at each node.
We call these new probabilities q probabilities.
Then, expected return on the replicating portfolio
under these q probabilities equals the risk-free rate.
This is because the return on the portfolio
is a weighted average of returns on its positions,
and both the stock and the bond have the same expected return
under the q probabilities, the risk-free rate.
Next, we apply the discounted cash flow formula
to determine the value of the replicating portfolio, which
is the same as the payoff of the option.
The discount rate and the discounted cash flow relation
is the expected return on the replicating portfolio, computed
under the q probabilities.
Based on our construction, this discount rate
is the risk-free rate.
We reach the conclusion that the price of the option at time 0
is equal to its expected payoff evaluated
under the q probabilities discounted
at the risk-free interest rate.

Notice that we are able to derive
the risk-neutral valuation formula using
only the result that dynamic replication is possible.
We did not use the exact expression
for the replicating portfolio or the option price.
Also, note that the q probabilities we introduce here
must be given by our formula for the risk-neutral probabilities.
There is only one way to assign the probability
to the up node on the tree to make expected stock
return equal to the risk-free rate.
We can price all assets in the model using
the risk-neutral probabilities.
For example, the initial price of the stock
is equal to the expected value of the terminal stock
price computed under the risk-neutral probabilities
discounted at the risk-free rate.
In our numerical example, with u equal to 1.5 and d
equal to 0.5, the q probability of the up move is 0.6.
Then, we confirm that the initial stock price of $50
is indeed equal to the expected terminal price discounted
at the 10% interest rate.
For the bond, the risk-neutral valuation formula
clearly holds.
And the option price at time 0 computed
using the risk-neutral formula is
the same as the price we have derived
using dynamic replication.
This has to be the case, of course, based
on our general definition of the risk-neutral valuation formula.
In summary, the risk-neutral price simulation
applies to the basic assets, the stock, and the bond,
and to all options on the stock.
In a multi-period model, we use the same approach.
All we need is to compute the probabilities
of the various nodes in the tree using
the risk-neutral transition probabilities between nodes
each period.
We then discount expected payoffs
at the risk-free rate over multiple periods.
The numerical examples here illustrate
how to compute the prices of the European call
and put options in a two-period binomial model.