
PROFESSOR: We now apply the risk-neutral valuation method
to exotic options.
The payoff of exotic options is typically path dependent.
For example, consider an up-and-out put option.
This option pays off as a regular European put
unless, at some point during the life of the option,
the price of the stock exceeds a barrier specified by the option
contract.
The payoff of an up-and-out put depends
on the maximum stock price observed
over the life of the option contract.
As a result, the payoff of the option at maturity
depends not only on the stock price at that date,
but on all preceding values of the stock price.
In other words, the payoff depends on the entire path
of the stock price.
It is path dependent.
When it comes to path-dependent options,
our original approach to pricing by replication
is not practical.
The challenge is that the number of nodes on the binomial tree
grows exponentially with the number of time periods.
Know that without path dependence,
the three recombines.
The ud node is the same as the du node, and so on.
This drastically reduces the number
of steps we need to take along the tree.
The risk-neutral approach to valuation
can be used effectively for pricing of exotic options.
The key difference is that under the risk-neutral approach,
we can estimate the option price by Monte Carlo simulation.
Specifically, we sample from the set of terminal nodes
according to their risk-neutral probabilities
and use their relatively small sample
to estimate the true expected value of the option payoff.
We do not need to visit all terminal nodes.
Monte Carlo simulation has many applications in finance.
It is based on the law of large numbers,
the same mathematical relation that
allows us to estimate unknown population moments from finance
historical samples.
Once we estimate the price of the option using
the risk-neutral formulation, we can
compute the composition of the replicating portfolio
at any node.
The simplification is that we need
to compute the replicating portfolio only
at the nodes of the three visited by the stock price.
We can do this in real time.
We do not need to compute the replicating portfolio
at every single node, which is what
creates the computational bottleneck
for the original replication approach.
As an example, consider the so-called Asian option.
This is a path-dependent exotic option
for which the payoff is based on the average realized stock
price over the life of the option.
Specifically, assume that there are two periods in the model.
Cap T is equal to 2.
Consider the Asian call option with a strike price of $40.
Its payoff is equal to the maximum of 0
and the difference between the average stock
price between 0 and 2 and the strike price of $40.
We represent the payoff of the option
at expiration of the binomial tree on the right.
Note that the payoff at the ud node
is not the same as at the du node.
This reflects the path-dependent nature of the Asian option.
We compute the price of the call using
the risk-neutral valuation formula.
We average the payoff of the option over the terminal
nodes of the tree using the risk-neutral probabilities
as weights.
Then, we discount the result at time 0 at the risk-free rate.
The time 0 price of the option is $14.46.
Next, we illustrate how to compute
the replicating portfolio.
Note that we can follow this approach
to compute the replicating portfolio as needed
for any visited node.
For example, to compute the replicating portfolio
at the node u at time 1, we need to know the price of the option
only in the current node and in the nodes uu and ud, which
follow the current time 1 node u.
To replicate the option, we buy delta shares of the stock
and invest b dollars at the risk-free rate.
The delta of the option is equal to the difference
between the option prices in nodes uu and ud
divided by the corresponding difference in stock prices.
The size of the bond position in the portfolio
is equal to the difference between the option price
and the value of the stock position, which
is delta times the stock price at node u at time 1.