
PROFESSOR: We now consider valuation of American options.
Recall that the holder of an American option
may decide to exercise at any point before maturity.
Because of the possibility of early exercise,
pricing an American option is more challenging than pricing
its European counterpart.
The payoff of the option depends on the exercise policy.
The optimal exercise decision, in turn,
depends on the prices of the option along the tree.
In other words, the price of the option and the optimal exercise
strategy are closely linked and must
be computed simultaneously.
The risk neutral relation connects option prices
across periods.
At any node at time t, the option price, P sub t,
is equal to the maximum of the option
payoff, if exercised immediately,
and the continuation value.
The continuation value is equal to the value of the option
if it is allowed to continue unexercised for one more period
and after that follows the optimal exercise strategy.
In other words, the continuation value
is equal to the discounted value of the option next period.
Consider a numerical example.
This is an American put option on the stock
with a strike price of $100.
The price of the stock starts at $100 and rises or falls by 20%
each period.
The interest rate is 10% per period.
We compute the risk neutral probabilities first.
q is equal to 0.75.
Consider the up node at time 1 first.
In this case, the continuation value is equal to 0.91.
This is the risk neutral expectation of the option value
next period, which is $1, discounted
at the 10% rate over one period.
If one were to exercise the option at that node,
the payoff would be negative, since the stock
price is above the strike.
We conclude that the immediate exercise is not optimal,
and the price of the option at node u
is equal to the continuation value.
Next, consider node d at time 1.
Here, the continuation value is $10.91.
The payoff from immediate exercise is $20.
The strike price is $100.
And the current price of the stock is $80.
We conclude that it is optimal to exercise the option
immediately at this node.
As a result, the price of the option
is equal to the payoff from its exercise, or $20.
We proceed back to time 0 and perform the same computation.
The continuation value at time 0 is
equal to the discounted value of the option price
at time 1, which is 0.91 in the up
node and 20 in the down node.
This gives us $5.17.
The payoff from immediate exercise is 0,
and we conclude that the initial price of this American put
is $5.17.
We now illustrate how to replicate the American option
by dynamic trading.
The overall approach is the same as for the European options.
We compute the option's delta from option prices and stock
prices.
For example, consider the time 0 node.
To compute the delta of the option here,
we need to know option prices in the up and down nodes
next period.
These are 0.91 and 20, respectively.
We take the difference between these two prices of the option
and divide by the difference between the corresponding stock
prices--
$120 minus $80.
We find that the delta is minus 0.48.
This means that, under the replication strategy,
we should short sell 0.48 shares of the stock at time 0.
Combine the proceeds with the $5.17 initial option price,
and invest the proceeds for one period at the risk-free rate.

Next period, we rebalance the replicating portfolio using
the same sequence of steps.