
PROFESSOR: To approximate a continuous distribution
of asset returns using a binomial model--
we need to increase the number of binomial steps
relative to the physical length of the time period.
As we reduce the length of each time step,
we hold the maturity of the option fixed.
As a result, we can make sure that the binomial distribution
of log returns converges to a normal distribution.
The key model parameters are u and d.
These parameters control the magnitude of price changes
with each step of the binomial tree.
We choose u and d to reflect the distribution of stock returns.
One possible choice is as follows.
U is the exponential of the return volatility
times the square root of the timestep of the tree.
d is inversely related to u.
The probability of the up move of the tree
does not affect option prices.
We specify it here for completeness.
For some computations, we might want to compute objects
like expected returns, which require
modeling the physical distribution of stock returns.
We said the probability of the up move
to be equal to 1/2 plus 1/2 of the ratio of mu
to sigma times the square root of the timestep.
Here, mu is the expected stock return continuously compounded,
and sigma is the standard deviation of log returns.
We refer to sigma as the volatility of stock returns
or, in short, stocks' volatility.
Our construction here illustrates how a binomial tree
could be used to approximate a continuous distribution
of stock returns, the so-called log normal distribution.
We should note that the parameterization we show here
is not unique.
We could parameterize the binomial tree differently
to converge to the same limiting distribution.
We could also define the parameters of the tree
so that result in distribution is not log normal.
For example, if we allowed the magnitude of the price change
to vary across the tree, we can approximate stock return
processes with time-varying conditional variance.
The binomial tree is a highly flexible and versatile model,
which can be used to approximate empirically realistic processes
for stock returns.
