
PROFESSOR: If we reduce the time length of the binomial step
towards 0 holding the maturity date of the option fixed,
our pricing formula for the European call
converges in the limit to the highlighted expression.
This pricing formula is the famous Black-Scholes-Merton
formula for the prices of European call options.
This formula uses our standard notation
with the addition of one new element,
the function N here denotes the cumulative distribution
function of the standard normal random variable.
Note that just like for the binomial model,
the option price depends on the strike
price of the option and its time to maturity, the initial stock
price, the risk-free rate, and the standard deviation of stock
returns.
Option price does not depend on the expected stock return which
corresponds to the probability of the up or down move
in the binomial model.

As we discussed, in the limit of the timestep
of the binomial tree converging to 0,
the distribution of stock returns
converges to a log normal distribution.
This type of process for the stock price
is known as the geometric Brownian motion.
The original derivation of the Black-Scholes-Merton model
does not start with the binomial model.
Instead, it begins with the assumption
that the stock price follows the geometric Brownian
motion so that stock returns are log normally distributed.
Then, the replication argument can
be used to derive the expression for the option price.
This requires advanced mathematical methods
for dealing with continuous time-price processes
and portfolio rebalancing.
These methods are known as stochastic calculus.
In contrast, our derivation here uses the binomial model
and does not require such advanced mathematics.
Let's take a closer look at the Black-Scholes-Merton formula.
We know that the value of the option
is equal to the value of its replicating portfolio.
The replicating portfolio for a call
is a levered long position in the stock.
The first term in the formula corresponds to the dollar
amount invested in the stock.
It's a product of the stock price
and the number of shares of the stock
in the replicating portfolio.
The second term in the formula reflects
the dollar amount borrowed.
As we just pointed out, the term N of x
is the number of shares of the stock
in the replicating portfolio, or the options delta.
It is the limit of the binomial formula
as the timestep converges to 0 and single-period stock price
movements become infinitesimal.
We can see that in the limit, the binomial expression
for the options delta converges to the partial derivative
of the option price with respect to the stock price, which
is equal to N of x.
We are now in a position to investigate
how stock return volatility affects option prices.
We do this in the context of the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
which is the limit of the binomial model.
This model imposes two important assumptions.
The stock price follows the geometric Brownian motion,
which means that stock returns are log normal
and independently and identically distributed
across non-overlapping periods.
The interest rate is constant.
Under the Black-Scholes-Merton model, prices of European
calls and puts increase with stock return volatility.
To see why option values increase
with the volatility of the underlying
asset under the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
consider a simple binomial example.
We have two firms, A and B, with the same current price of $100.
There are two states next period, good and bad.
B has higher volatility of future prices.
Its value is lower in the bad state
and higher in the good state compared to A.
Consider a call options written on A and B
with the same exercise price of $100.
The call on B pays off more than the call on A in the good state
and the same amount in the bad state.
It is clear that the call on stock B
should be more valuable.
Higher volatility of stock returns
means that at expiration, we are more likely to see
very high and very low returns.
This raises the value of the call option.
The call option benefits from high underlying price
at maturity, while the payoff of the option for low underlying
prices is capped at 0.
The option provides upside participation,
but limited downside.
It benefits from higher volatility.
Similar logic applies to the put options,
which are connected to the calls by the put-call parity.