
PROFESSOR: We now introduce what is known as the option Greeks.
Option Greeks are measures of sensitivity of option prices
to small changes in various inputs.
These have been traditionally denoted by Greek letters, hence
their name.
We have encountered one commonly used option Greek already,
the delta.
Options delta is the partial derivative
of the option price with respect to the underlying price.
It measures sensitivity of the option price
to small changes in the underlying price.
Related to delta is the omega, which
measures the elasticity of the option price
to the underlying price.
Options omega can be seen as a measure of leverage
embedded in the option.
Omega measures the percentage change in the option price
relative to the percentage change in the underlying price.
Another important measure is the options gamma.
Gamma is the second derivative of the options
price with respect to the underlying price.
It measures convexity of the option price function.
The higher the gamma, the more the option holder
benefits from future volatility of the underlying price.
Also, because gamma is the derivative of the delta,
options with high gamma are in some sense harder
to replicate in practice, as the number
of shares in the replicating portfolio
is more sensitive to the underlying price.

In addition to measuring option price sensitivity
to the underlying price, it is also
common to compute price sensitivity
to model parameters.
Theta measures how quickly the price of the option
changes with time to maturity.
While higher future return volatility
raises the value of call and put options,
their value tends to decline as options approach maturity.
Theta measures the speed of this decline.
The last Greek we want to highlight here is vega.
Vega is the sensitivity of the option price to stock return
volatility.
Stock return volatility is constant
under the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
yet it is useful to know how sensitive option prices are
to the volatility parameter because the assumption
of constant return volatility is only an approximation.
Options vega provides us with an indication
of how option prices may change as stock return
volatility rises or falls.
This is a shortcut.
A more comprehensive and internally consistent
analysis of this question would require
that we incorporate time-varying return volatility
into the option pricing model.
As an empirical illustration of the properties of options,
consider the behavior of several call
and put options on the S&P 500 index
during the first few days of August of 2011.
This has been a highly volatile period in the market
because of the unfolding US debt ceiling crisis.
According to the US Treasury, it was
going to run out of cash by mid-August
unless the US Congress agreed to raise the debt ceiling.
Following a tense debate in the Congress,
the debt ceiling was eventually raised
on the 31st of July, which enabled US government
to issue more debt.
On the 5th of August, Standard and Poor's credit rating agency
downgraded the long-term credit rating of the US government
from AAA to AA+ for the first time in history.
Because of the increased economic and political
uncertainty, the stock market fell sharply
during the first few days of August.
Prices of call options on the S&P 500
fell, and prices of put options rose.
For example, the call with a strike of $1,100
was in the money and traded at $184 on August 1.
Its price fell to $67.40 by August 10.
The call with the strike of $1,300 was out of the money
and traded at $25.80 on the 1st of August.
Its price fell to $1.20 by the 10th of August.
We observe that the out-of-the-money call
experienced a smaller dollar decline but a much larger
percentage decline than in-the-money call.

We observe a similar relation for the puts.
Prices of out-of-the-money puts rose more in percentage terms
than prices of the in-the-money puts.
This observation can be expressed as a statement
about the options Greeks.
Between the 1st and the 10th of August,
the value of the underlying fell by $156.20.
Relative to that, the value of the $1,100 strike call fell
by $116.60.
The ratio of these two numbers approximates
the delta of the option, 0.75.
This is less than the delta of the underlying asset itself,
which is 1.
This means that for $1 change of the underlying asset,
the price of the call option changes by less than $1.
In this case, for the $1,100 strike call,
it changes by $0.75.
For the $1,300 strike call, we approximate the delta
to be 0.16.
Prices of out-of-the-money calls are relatively less sensitive
to changes in the underlying price.
In contrast, the omega, which measures the elasticity
of the option price with respect to the underlying price,
meaning that it compares percentage changes,
is much higher for the $1,300 strike option.
It is 7.8.
This is compared to 5.2 for the $1,100 call.
The lesson here is that out-of-the-money options have
a high degree of embedded leverage relative
to the underlying asset, for which omega is equal to 1
by definition.
The figure on this slide illustrates the relation
between the option prices and the underlying price.
This is a scatterplot which shows
prices of two options, a call and a put,
both with the strike of $1,250 and maturity
in September of 2011.
These are plotted against the price of the underlying index.
We see that the price of the call option
is increasing in the underlying price.
The slope, which is the options delta,
is higher for higher index values, which is where the call
option is in-the-money.
This illustrates the higher delta of the in-the-money call
options.