
PROFESSOR: To implement the Black-Scholes-Merton formula,
we need to estimate volatility of stock returns, or sigma.
All the other inputs entered in the formula
are known precisely--
the current stock price, the strike
of the option, time to maturity, and the interest rate.
Stock return volatility is the only input
that needs to be estimated.
There are two ways to estimate the volatility parameter.
One approach is to use historical return volatility.
For that, we develop statistical estimates of volatility
using past returns on the underlying asset.
For example, one simple approach is
to use daily returns over a given period
to estimate daily volatility as the sample standard
deviation of stock returns.
We then analyze our estimate by multiplying daily volatility
by the square root of 252, which is the number of trading
days in a year.
Another approach is to use what is called implied volatility.
Under this approach, we price options relative to each other.
Let's say that we observe market prices of some other options.
We assume that these prices satisfy
the Black-Scholes-Merton formula and solve for the volatility
parameter to find the implied volatility.
As an example, suppose we need to price a call on a stock
with a strike price of $110 and time to maturity of one year.
Suppose that the current stock price is $100,
and the one-year interest rate is 6.18%.
Suppose we observe another call option with a strike
price of $120 trading at $3.16.
The implied volatility of that other option,
which reconciles its market price
with the Black-Scholes-Merton model, is 19%.

We then use 19% in the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
to price the call with a strike of $110.
One problem with this approach is that, in the data,
implied volatility may be different for options
with different strikes and maturities.
These empirical patterns of how implied volatility changes
across strikes and across maturities
are called volatility smiles and smirks because of their shape.
As we can see from the Bloomberg screenshot,
implied volatilities of options on IBM
are not equal across strikes and maturities.
The implied volatility column shows
that the implied volatility declines with the strike.
We observe this pattern for each of the three option
maturities shown here.
We also observe that the implied volatilities are not
flat across option maturities.
Here, we don't see a clear pattern.
But know that, for example, for the options with the strike
price of $130, implied volatility
is the lowest for the shorter maturity contracts.
The fact that implied volatilities
depend on the strike price of the option
is clearly at odds with the Black-Scholes-Merton model.
Under that model, the implied volatility
is equal to the physical volatility of stock returns,
which is a constant.
In practice, it is common to extend
the Black-Scholes-Merton model by adding features
like stochastic return volatility or discontinuous
return changes in order to better reconcile
the model with the data.
In the marketplace, the original Black-Scholes-Merton model
is used to compute implied volatilities, which
are commonly used to quote prices of options.
For that, the model itself does not need to be valid.
The implied volatility is always well-defined.
The next plot shows a historical series
for a popular summary of option-implied volatilities,
VIX.
VIX aggregates implied volatilities
across call and put options with different strikes
with a horizon close to 30 days.
VIX is widely used as an indicator of short-term market
volatility as derived from the options markets.
We should note that just like the forward interest rate
is a biased predictor of the future spot rates,
VIX is a biased predictor of the future stock return volatility.
This is because in addition to volatility expectations,
the current level of VIX also reflects a risk premium.
As we see from the plot, VIX tends
to fluctuate in the range of 10% to 20% most of the time,
with occasional spikes during periods of increased
economic uncertainty.
We see, for example, a large spike
during the global financial crisis
and during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Relative to other measures of uncertainty,
VIX provides a current market-based, forward-looking
measure of market volatility.