
PROFESSOR: This week, we introduce
one of the fundamental models in finance.
The capital asset pricing model, or in short, CAPM.
CAPM connects expected returns on various assets
to their risk.
CAPM tells us that the right measure of risk
is the covariance of asset return
with the so-called market portfolio.
We start with the derivation of the CAPM,
and then discuss its intuition.
Unlike the arbitrage pricing theory, which also delays
expected returns to risk, CAPM is an equilibrium model,
which emphasizes the balance between supply and demand
for financial assets.
The logic of CAPM is fundamental and far reaching,
and this model is one of the leading examples of equilibrium
thinking in finance.
We then discuss practical aspects
of applying the CAPM model, relevant empirical evidence,
and limitations of the model.
To derive the CAPM, we need to model investors' demand
for financial assets.
To do that, we built on the mean variance portfolio theory.
Under the mean various preferences,
investors diversify non systematic risk,
and end up holding only the risk free asset
and the specific portfolio of stocks--
the tangency portfolio.
We now ask, what does the combined demand
of all investors look like?
And how does this demand determine
the relation between risk and return on financial assets?
Before we dive into the derivation of the CAPM,
we need to introduce the notion of the market portfolio.
The market portfolio is a portfolio of all risky assets
traded in the market.
We will need some notation.
Suppose that there is a total of n risky assets traded
in the market.
We call these assets stocks.
Market capitalization, or in short,
market cap of each stock, is equal to its price
per share times the number of outstanding shares.
The total market cap of all stocks
is the sum of all the individual market caps.
This is the value, or the price, of the market portfolio.
Portfolio weights in the market portfolio
are then, given by the ratio of the market cap of each stock,
to the total value of the market portfolio.
We denote the vector of market portfolio weights by w sub m.
CAPM relies on a set of important assumptions
about the financial market and investors.
We begin by assuming that all investors invest
over a single period, t0 to t1.
They buy a portfolio of financial assets at time 0
and liquidate that portfolio at time one.
We also assume that the only source of wealth investors
have is their portfolio of financial assets.
They have no other sources of income.
This means that investors' preferences are defined
over the return on their portfolios between times 0
and time 1.
We assume that our investors have correct expectations,
meaning that they know the true distribution of asset returns.
This is also an important assumption.
It means that investors in the model
do not disagree with each other.
We assume that all investors have mean variance preferences.
They may have different levels of risk aversion,
but it is important that they only
care about the first two moments of returns on their portfolios.
Next, we assume that there exists a risk free asset
in the market.
We further assume that this asset is in 0 net supply.
This means that some investors may lend, others may borrow,
but their combined position in the risk free asset is 0.
For every dollar an investor borrows,
there must be another investor who is lending that dollar.
This assumption is not critical and could be relaxed.
For example, if we instead assume that the risk free asset
is in positive net supply, all we have to do
is include the risk free asset into the market portfolio.
As an aside, we may want to allow
for the net position in the risk free asset
to be positive, in order to model the fact that investors
can hold treasuries.
Note, however, that in the case of treasuries,
each dollar investors lend is $1 borrowed by the government.
If the government repays these loans from the revenue
it raises from taxes on the same investors,
and if you consider the tax liability
as a part of each investor's portfolio,
it is no longer obvious that there
is a positive net supply of the risk free asset in the market.
This line of reasoning quickly gets
into some fairly deep issues related to fiscal policy.
In the context of CAPM, we sidestep such issues,
and simply assume that the net supply of the risk free asset
is 0.
In this model, investors are not limited by constraints,
and can trade with no transaction costs.
In other words, the financial market is frictionless.
Finally, we state the market clearing condition.
Total demand for financial assets
must be equal to their total supply.
This means that each outstanding stock
share is held by some investor.
CAPM is what is called an equilibrium model.
Equilibrium models have two important elements--
first, they make assumptions about investors' behavior,
as we do here.
We assume mean variance preferences.
Second, these models impose the market clearing condition.
In equilibrium, prices must be such that supply equals demand.
As we combine the two elements, we
can begin to understand how individual investor
behavior affects prices in the financial markets.
CAPM is an important example of using equilibrium analysis
for pricing financial assets.
Note as a related observation that our analysis
of relative pricing, using the no arbitrage principle,
follows from equilibrium analysis.
As long as investors prefer more to less,
and are not constrained, arbitrage opportunities cannot
exist in equilibrium.
That means that in equilibrium, all the results derived
by pure arbitrage arguments must also hold.
Recall that under the assumptions
of mean various preferences and no constraints,
every investor puts their money into two pots--
the riskless asset, and a particular portfolio
of risky assets, which we call the tangency portfolio.
Note that here, we are also using the assumption
that investors know the true distribution of asset returns.
Because all investors hold the same risky portfolio,
or the tangency portfolio, they must hold stocks
in the same proportions.
Let's aggregate all the stock positions across the investors.
Collectively, they hold stocks in the same proportions
as in the tangency portfolio.
We will now impose the market clearing condition.
The total supply of all stocks in the market
is the market portfolio.
Investors demand the tangency portfolio.
Market clearing then implies that the tangency portfolio
and the market portfolio must be the same.
In other words, we conclude that the market portfolio must
be on the capital market line.
It is mean variance efficient.
We now illustrate the critical step in our argument.
The total asset holdings of all investors
must equal the total supply of these assets.
Consider a market with three stocks, a, b, and c.
Suppose that the composition of the tangency portfolio
is the following--
25% in stock a, 50% in stock b, and 25% in stock c.
There are only three investors in this economy.
We will label them as one, two, and three.
The total wealth of these investors
is $500, $1,000, and $1,500, respectively.
We summarize asset holdings of each investor
in the following table.
We can see how much they invest in the risk free asset,
and in each of the stocks.
For example investor one splits her investments
between the risk free asset and the tangency portfolio.
She holds $100 in the safe asset and $400
in the tangency portfolio.
Which means $100 in stock a, $200 in stock b,
and $100 in stock c.
Investor three borrows at the risk free rate.
So the risk free position of this investor is negative.
The risky position is also the tangency portfolio,
with a total of $1,800 invested into the stocks.
Know that this investor starts with $1,500 in total wealth,
and borrows $300 more at the risk free rate, which
brings the total value invested in stocks to $1,800.
Collectively, investors do not hold the safe asset.
We can see that their individual holdings in the risk free asset
sum up to zero.
Their combined holdings of the stocks
are $750 in stock a, $1,500 in stock b, And $750 in stock c.
In equilibrium, the total dollar holding of each asset
must equal its market value, because all
the outstanding shares of stocks are held by the investors.
We then conclude that the market cap of stock a is $750,
it is $1,500 for stock b, and $750 for stock c.
The total market cap of the market portfolio
is 3,000, which is the sum of the market caps of stocks
a, b, and c.
We then compute the weights of the three stocks
in the market portfolio, and confirm
that they are the same as the weights
in the tangency portfolio.
Namely, 0.25 for a, 0.5 for b, and 0.25 for c.
We are now ready to establish the CAPM formula.
We have done all the heavy lifting
in the context of mean variance portfolio choice.
Now we apply our prior results.
Recall that the marginal contribution
of an asset to the expected excess return of the market
portfolio is given by its own expected excess return.
The marginal contribution of an asset to the risk of the market
portfolio is given by the covariance of the asset
with the market, divided by the standard deviation of market
returns.
Because the market portfolio is the tangency portfolio,
the marginal return to risk ratio for each asset
must be the same, and equal to the Sharpe ratio of the market
portfolio.
This is the CAPM result. We now rewrite the CAPM result
with the risk premium on the left hand side.
The risk premium of a stock is equal to the market risk
premium times the beta of the stock,
with respect to the market portfolio.
The market beta is the ratio of the covariance of assets return
with the market portfolio, normalized by the market return
variance.
Stock's beta summarizes its systematic risk.
It's the exposure of the stock to the market return.
CAPM tells us that the beta of the stock,
with respect to the market, is the right measure
of systematic risk.
Mathematically, the market beta is
equivalent to a factor loading in the ABT framework,
where the only risk factor is the market return.
The market risk premium is the price of systematic risk.
It's the amount of compensation a stock
delivers to the investors per unit of systematic risk.
The risk premium of any stock is a product
of the quantity of systematic risk, or its market
data, and the price of risk, which
is the market risk premium.
