
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we discuss
the relation between risk and return under the CAPM model.
Under CAPM, the risk premium of any stock
is proportional to its market beta.
This is a linear relationship between risk and return.
And we can represent that graphically.
On the graph, we show the market beta on the horizontal axis.
On the vertical axis, we show the expected return of a stock.
The risk-free asset, for example,
is on the vertical axis because its market beta is zero.
We represent the linear CAPM relation
between systematic risk and expected return
as a straight line, which is called the security market
line or, in short, SML.
We should not confuse this with the capital market line, which
represents the lowest possible standard deviation of portfolio
return for a given level of expected return.
In addition to the risk-free asset,
the security market line passes through a point representing
the market portfolio.
For this point, the market beta is equal to 1.
And the expected return is the market expected return.
We see that the slope of the security market line
is equal to the market risk premium.
For any other asset, we can determine its expected return
in relation to its market beta according
to the linear relation plotted here.
As an example, suppose that CAPM holds.
The expected market return is 8%.
And the risk-free rate is 2%.
In this market, any asset with zero market beta
earns the same expected return as the risk-free rate.
Note that this is true even if this asset is highly volatile.
Under CAPM, such an asset has only idiosyncratic risk.
And such risk is not compensated by the market.
Any asset with the market beta of 1
has the expected return equal to the market expected return,
which is 8%.
Again, an asset could be much more volatile
than the market portfolio.
Yet, it earns the same expected return.
The reason is that total return volatility is not
the right measure of risk.
The market beta is.
Investors in this framework do not hold a single asset.
They hold the market portfolio, which
benefits from diversification.
As a result, from the perspective
of these diversified investors, an asset
contributes to their portfolio risk in proportion
to its market beta.
Market beta is the right measure of stocks systematic risk
not its total volatility or variance.
Next, consider an asset with the market beta of 0.5.
Systematic risk of this asset is lower than that of the market
portfolio by a factor of 2.
According to CAPM, the risk premium of this asset
is also lower by the same factor.
We conclude that the expected return on such an asset
should be the risk-free rate or 2%
plus its beta, 0.5, scaled by the market risk premium, which
is 6%.
The result is 5%.
Finally, suppose we have an asset with the market
beta of minus 0.6.
For this asset, using the CAPM formula,
we find the expected return of minus 1.6%.
It is negative.
Why would investors be willing to hold
an asset with a negative expected return.
The reason is that having an asset
like that in the portfolio helps lower the overall portfolio
risk.
This asset effectively provides insurance
against market declines.
Such insurance is costly.
And this cost amounts to losing 1.6% in expectation
on each dollar invested in the asset.
We now consider the risk return trade-off
under CAPM from a slightly different angle.
For any asset we can decompose its excess return
by regressing it on the market excess return using the OLS
regression.
As a result, the excess return is equal to the intercept
or alpha plus the excess return on the market
scaled by the slope coefficient, which is equal to the asset's
market beta.
Plus the residual, which is 0 in expectation and is
uncorrelated with the market return.
Note that this decomposition has nothing to do with the CAPM.
We can always decompose asset returns in such manner.
What we have here is a mathematical identity.
CAPM tells us something more.
Under CAPM, the intercept, the alpha of the asset,
must be equal to 0.
In empirical analysis, it is very common
to express the implication of the CAPM
as we have here as a restriction on the intercept in the OLS
regression of the stock's excess return
on the market excess return.
If CAPM holds, alphas of all assets should be 0.
Alpha is, therefore, a measure of violation
of the CAPM formula.
A non-zero alpha implies that an asset earns expected return
above and beyond what is justified
by its systematic risk, or its market beta.
What should we think if we encounter an asset
with a positive or negative alpha?
Is this evidence of mispricing or an attractive investment
opportunity?
First, we need to worry about estimation errors.
True values of the coefficients in our regression
are not known.
Our empirical estimates based on the past return data are noisy.
Our estimates may also be biased if the distribution of returns
is not stable across time.
This is the case of past returns not
predicting future performance.
It is a lot easier to find alpha in past data
than to realize it in actual investments going forward.
We should also keep in mind that if CAPM fails,
alpha may not represent a free lunch.
It may reflect markets compensation
for other sources of systematic risk, which
are distinct from the market return,
yet, important to investors.
There may be many other reasons for the failure
of CAPM in the data.
CAPM is a theoretical model based on strong assumptions
about the market and investors.
Various trading frictions, including
transaction costs, constraints on positions,
as well as taxes and capital gains and dividends,
may lead to deviations from the CAPM relation.
Yet, these deviations may not be easy to exploit,
in part because of the frictions that give rise to them.
We now consider how exactly an investor could take
advantage of CAPM violations.
Suppose that the alpha in our return
decomposition is non-zero.
Consider a mean variance optimizing investor.
We want to know how this investor should deviate
from holding the market portfolio in order to exploit
a CAPM violation or mispricing.
We will show that if CAPM is violated,
an investor can achieve a higher Sharpe
ratio than what is offered by the market portfolio.
And we will compute the highest possible Sharpe ratio
explicitly.
To simplify our analysis, let's first
construct a particular portfolio.
Call it portfolio P. Portfolio P includes three positions.
A $1 long position in stock i, which is our mispriced asset.
A position in the market portfolio,
which equals in size the negative of the market
beta of stock i.
So if our stock has a positive market beta,
this will be a short position in the market portfolio.
Finally, the third position is beta dollars
invested at the risk-free rate.
The total investment in portfolio P is $1.
The portfolio return is described
by the following equation.
It is a weighted average of returns on the three portfolio
positions.
This is the return on asset i minus its beta
times the excess return on the market portfolio.
Using the above decomposition of the return on asset i,
we find that the return on portfolio P
equals the risk-free rate plus the alpha
of asset i plus its idiosyncratic return,
epsilon i.
Know that, by construction, the return on portfolio P
is uncorrelated with the market return.
Moreover, the Sharpe ratio of this portfolio
is equal to the ratio of the alpha of asset i
to the standard deviation of its idiosyncratic return,
epsilon i.

Note that instead of deciding how
to invest in a combination of the market portfolio and asset
i, we can equivalently solve for the mean variance optimal
combination of the market portfolio
and portfolio P. In other words, we
want to find the tangency portfolio using two assets--
portfolio P and the market portfolio.
Using the general solution for the tangency portfolio, which
in this case is particularly simple because the two assets--
the market portfolio and portfolio P--
are uncorrelated, we find that the weight on the market
is proportional to the ratio of the market risk premium
to the market return variance.
The weight on portfolio P in the tangency portfolio
is proportional to the ratio of its risk premium,
which is alpha i, to its return variance, which
is the variance of epsilon i.
After a little algebra, we find that the Sharpe
ratio of the tangency portfolio is
the square root of the sum of squares of the Sharpe
ratios of the market portfolio and portfolio P. This
is a useful formula to keep in mind in general
as it applies to portfolios with uncorrelated assets.
In summary, we see that whenever CAPM is violated
investors have an opportunity to improve their Sharpe
ratio by deviating from the market portfolio.
Failure of the CAPM means that the market portfolio
is not on the efficient frontier and does not
have the highest possible Sharpe ratio.
The magnitude of the violation of the CAPM
can be summarized by the possible improvement
in the Sharpe ratio, which in turn is
a function of the Sharpe ratio of portfolio P.
It's the ratio of the alpha of the mispriced asset
to its idiosyncratic volatility.