
PROFESSOR: In this section, we compare CAPM to the APT model
and discuss their similarities and differences.
The CAPM pricing equation is a mathematical
equivalent to the single factor APT model,
where the market portfolio is the only systematic risk
factor.
This begs the question, how exactly
does CAPM relate to APT?
What are the similarities and differences between these two
fundamental theories?
Starting with the differences between the two models,
CAPM and APT are derived from very different assumptions.
CAPM places strong restrictions on investor preferences.
We have to assume that all investors are
mean variance optimizers.
In comparison, APT only requires that investors
prefer more to less.
In other words, there is no arbitrage in the market.

APT requires that asset returns obey a factor structure.
CAPM does not assume any effective structure in returns.
Another point of difference is that CAPM pricing
applies to all assets.
In contrast, the APT pricing equation
holds exactly only for the well-diversified portfolios.
For all other assets, it holds only approximately.
A relatively small number of assets
may violate the APT equation without creating arbitrage
in the market.
Under CAPM, market return is the only systematic risk
we need to consider.
CAPM is specific about the identity of the risk factor.
APT potentially allows for multiple risk factors,
but does not tell us what these factors are.
With these considerations in mind,
can we reconcile CAPM and APT?
Specifically, if we assume that stock returns are
driven by multiple systematic factors, could CAPM still hold?
The answer is yes.
There is no contradiction here.
The CAPM relation would still hold
under the CAPM assumptions.
In which case, the market factor would
price all of the APT factors according to the CAPM formula.

Ultimately, the two models, CAPM and APT,
share the same fundamental insight.
That only systematic risk is compensated in the market.
Idiosyncratic risk does not carry a risk premium.
This is a far reaching conclusion,
which holds under many other asset pricing models.
Let us reiterate the intuition for the CAPM result.
Optimizing investors choose to hold the market
portfolio, which provides the best possible risk return
trade-off.
Idiosyncratic risk of an individual stock
ends up diversified within the market portfolio.
And therefore, it does not affect the expected return
on the stock in equilibrium.