
PROFESSOR: In this section, we discuss the typical sequence
of steps needed to implement the CAPM model in practice.
We also point out the advantages of using
CAPM or a similar model relative to the direct estimation
of expected returns.
Suppose we want to estimate the expected returns on two stocks.
We will call them IBM and Dell, but the numbers we use
are hypothetical.
First, we need to decide how to measure returns
on the market portfolio.
For this purpose, it is common to approximate the market
as a diversified value-weighted portfolio of stocks,
for instance, an S&P 500 index or evaluate
the portfolio of all public firms traded on major stock
exchanges.
Second, we run a linear regression
of individual stock returns on the market return
in order to estimate stock betas.
Suppose we find that the market beta for IBM is 0.8,
and for Dell, it is higher--
1.3.
Third, we estimate the market risk premium.
For instance, we may compute the historical average
of excess returns on the market portfolio.
Suppose we find that the market risk premium is 6%.
We'll look up the current risk free rate.
Suppose it is 2%.
Finally, we apply the CAPM formula.
In case of IBM, the risk free rate
of 2% plus the beta of 0.8 times the market premium of 6%
gives us the expected return of 6.8%.
For Dell, which has a higher market beta,
we obtain a higher estimate of expected return--
9.8%.

What are the advantages of using models like CAPM and APT
to estimate expected returns on stocks?
Why don't we simply use average historical returns
to estimate expected return?
Assuming that the true distribution of stock returns
is stable over time, which means that past data is
informative about the future distribution,
there is nothing fundamentally wrong with using
historical average returns.
However, historical samples of returns on individual assets
may be too short to estimate the expected returns
with necessary precision.
It is also quite possible that as companies
change their properties over time, the risk
and expected returns change.
In this case, even if a long series
of past returns of a stock is available,
we may not be able to use it to forecast future returns.
That is because the same firm many years ago may have
had very different properties.
How do models like CAPM and APT help
us deal with such challenges?
First, from the point of view of statistical inference,
we can often estimate return betas
with much more precision than expected returns.
And importantly, we can do so using relatively short samples
with frequent observations.
For example, one may be able to obtain a high precision
estimate of the market beta of a stock using
only six months of daily data, while it
may take decades of data to obtain a comparably accurate
estimate of expected returns.

Of course, both CAPM and APT require
us to estimate the market price of systematic risk.
For example, in case of CAPM, we need to know the risk premium
on the market portfolio.
For that, we may have to use the average historical return
or explore other alternatives, for instance, backing out
the discount rate on the market from a forward-looking stock
valuation model, like the Gordon model.
Here, it's important to note that even if we
do use the historical average returns to estimate the market
risk premium, this is a more tractable problem
than estimating expected returns on the individual stocks.
First, the market portfolio is less volatile.
It has no idiosyncratic risk.
This helps with precision.
Second, we have access to a relatively long
historical return series for the market,
certainly much longer than for the majority of stocks.
This, again, helps with precision.
Finally, although the distribution
of returns on the market portfolio
may not be constant over time, it
is arguably more stable than for individual stocks.
In summary, the key advantage of using risk-based models
like CAPM and APT to estimate the expected returns
is that we can derive expected return estimates
from the estimates of systematic risk.
We do not need to rely on the average past returns
in order to estimate the expected future returns.
