PROFESSOR: In this segment, we look
at the empirical properties of market betas
and discuss how stock betas are related
to the economic fundamentals of firms.
The table here contains estimates of market betas
for a number of stocks.
These estimates are based on daily data
over a six-month period.
Note that all the beta estimates here are positive.
All the stocks in this table covary positively
with the stock market portfolio.
This is typical for the majority of stocks.
These estimates fall into range between 0.3 and 1.7.
This also applies to the majority
of stocks in the market.
Note also that the average beta in the table
appears to be close to 1.
This is intuitive because the beta of any portfolio
is a weighted average of individual betas,
and the beta of the market portfolio is 1.
This means that the weighted average beta of all the stocks
in the market portfolio is 1.
Finally, consider the total volatility of stock returns
relative to the stock-specific or idiosyncratic volatility.
The difference between these two is
the market-wide systematic risk, which is proportional
to the stock's beta.
For many stocks, most of their daily variation
is due to firm-specific shocks.
Market risk explains a relatively small portion
of their total return variance.
These numbers highlight that total return volatility
of a stock is a poor proxy for its risk premium.
Most of the return variance of individual stocks
is idiosyncratic and gets diversified
when we combine stocks into a diversified portfolio,
such as the market portfolio.
Next, we consider market betas of various industries estimated
with monthly data over a five-year period.
We see approximately the same range of values
as for the stocks in our previous table.
We can also ask why industry betas differ from each other.
Do these numbers reflect some important differences
in economic fundamentals?
One pattern we can see is that some of the lowest betas
correspond to the relatively stable industries,
such as utilities and consumer staples.
Some of the highest values come from the more cyclical
sectors--
energy or chemicals.
In other words, industry cyclicality matters.
Industries with the more cyclical demand
for their output tend to have more cyclical cash
flows, which contributes to their higher market betas.
Other aggregate shocks may be important here as well.
For example, industries differ in their reliance
on credit markets, which also contributes to their cash flow
risk.
Finally, it is important to keep in mind that we are looking
at the market betas of stocks.
There is a difference between the value of the firm's stock
and the overall firm value.
Stocks represent just one type of corporate claims.
As a result, properties of a stock
depend not only on the economic fundamentals of the firm,
but also on its capital structure,
specifically on how much debt the firm has
relative to its equity value.
The more debt the firm has relative to its equity, or put
differently, the more leverage the firm has,
the higher its equity beta relative to its asset beta.
So all else equal, firms using more leverage
should have higher equity betas.
What complicates this picture is that leverage level
is at least partly a choice.
Firms decide how much debt to issue,
and firms with more stable cash flows
tend to use more debt in their capital structure.
This means that firms using more leverage
tend to have lower enterprise betas or asset betas.
The bottom line is that the relation
between the level of leverage and equity betas across firms
is far from straightforward.
Consider an example of how equity beta relates
to the enterprise beta of a firm.
Suppose that firm ABC is financed
by a mix of debt and equity, and its debt to equity ratio
is 0.65.
Debt of ABC is relatively safe, and its market beta is low--
0.1.
Assume that the market beta of ABC stock is 0.73.
What can we say about the enterprise-level market
beta of ABC, or in other words, the beta of its assets?
Because ABC has only debt and equity in its capital
structure, together, its debt and equity
represent the claim on all of its assets.
We conclude that the combined market
value of ABC's debt and equity equals its enterprise value.
The enterprise is a portfolio of firm's debt and equity.
The beta of a portfolio is a weighted average
of the betas of individual positions.
Using this observation, we can compute
the enterprise beta of ABC.
It is the beta of its equity, 0.73,
times the weight of equity in its capital structure,
which is 1 over 165, plus the debt beta, 0.1,
times the weight of debt, which is 0.65 over 1.65.
We find that the enterprise beta is equal to 0.48.
Note that the equity beta is higher than the enterprise
beta of ABC.
This is due to the effect of leverage
created by the firm's debt.
