PROFESSOR: In this segment, we discuss how well the CAPM
model works in the data.
We'll look at the most common empirical tests of the CAPM.
Our goal is to establish how well market betas of firms
explain differences in their average stock returns.
In the first test, we form portfolios of firms
with different market betas.
There are two reasons for grouping firms into portfolios.
First, firm-level betas may change over time.
Sorting firms into portfolios based on their estimated betas
allows us to construct assets or portfolios
with relatively stable betas, which simplifies the test.
Second, firm-level betas are estimated with noise.
Grouping stocks into portfolios reduces
the effect of noise in a simple and intuitive manner.
Let's look closely at the test design.
We follow the well-known 1972 paper
by Black, Jensen, and Scholes.
Each month, we compute the excess return
on each stock as the difference between its return
from the start to the end of the month
and the risk-free interest rate, which we measure
as the one-month T-Bill rate.
Then, for each security, we use the most recent 60 months
of returns to estimate its market beta.
For that, we run the OLS regression of excess returns
on the stock on the excess market returns.
Finally, at the start of each year,
we sort firms into portfolios based
on their recent beta estimates as of the end of December
of the previous year.

For each portfolio, we compute its excess return each month.
We use valuated portfolio returns.
Note that we construct portfolio returns only
after the portfolio formation.
For example, if we are creating portfolios
by sorting on beta estimates at the end of year 2005,
we then compute monthly portfolio returns
during year 2006 and so on.
Once we have constructed the time series of portfolio excess
returns, we compute the market betas
for each portfolio using a full-sample regression
of portfolio excess returns on the market excess returns.
We also compute the time-series average
of excess monthly returns on each of the 10 portfolios.
To visualize the risk-return tradeoff across the 10
portfolios, we plot their average returns
against their market betas.
As we see from the graph, over 1931 to 2019 period,
there is a positive relation between the market beta
and expected excess returns, which
is consistent with the CAPM prediction.
However, this positive relation is not as strong
as the CAPM predicts.
The slope of the security market line is approximately 3.5%.
According to the CAPM, the slope should
be equal to the market risk premium
during this period, which is roughly twice as large.
If we limit our analysis to the later part
of the sample starting in 1963, the security market line
is even more flat.
This plot also implies that the expected excess return
on the assets with zero market betas is much higher than 0,
as the CAPM would imply.
It is roughly 6% per year.
Other examples of CAPM violations
can be constructed by sorting stocks on certain firm
characteristics, such as firm size or the market
to book ratio of its equity.
In the well-known 1992 paper, Fama and French show that small
stocks and stocks with high market to book ratios called
value stocks tend to outperform, and their relatively high
average returns cannot be properly explained by the CAPM.
There are two main competing interpretations
of the empirical evidence on the failures of CAPM.
One possible conclusion is that small stocks,
high book to market stocks, low beta stocks, and so forth
are mispriced by the market, and our analysis
reveals the true alpha--
abnormal risk-adjusted returns.
One should be careful and not jump to this conclusion
too soon.
If true, this type of mispricing is quite easy to find.
It is then puzzling that it does not get arbitraged away
by the professional asset managers, who collectively
struggle to outperform passive investment benchmarks,
such as the valuated stock market index or S&P 500.
Perhaps it is difficult to take advantage of such mispricing
because of market frictions, such as, for instance,
relatively low liquidity of small stocks.

Another interpretation is that CAPM is not complete
and it misses important risk factors.
Such missing factors would then manifest themselves
as CAPM alphas.

Which interpretation is right is still
an open question and the subject of an extensive and growing
literature.
It is difficult to argue that CAPM alphas can
be fully explained by the missing risk factors.
It is likely that market frictions also play a role.
However, existing evidence strongly
suggests that the stock market return is not
the only risk factor compensated with the risk premium.
This means that multifactor extensions
may offer an improvement over the single-factor CAPM model.
Such extensions can be developed under the APT framework.