
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we'll
consider how CAPM is used in capital budgeting.
We rely on a survey of 392 chief financial officers published
in 2001 by John Graham and Cam Harvey.
One of the questions they asked in the survey
was about the valuation techniques
these CFOs use for capital budgeting decisions.
In particular, the question was about estimation
of the cost of capital.
As we can see from the graph summarizing the responses,
CAPM is by far the most commonly used model.
Over 70% of the managers use CAPM.
Managers typically apply multiple models,
and we can see that the sum across the answers
is over 100%.
The second common approach is the arithmetic average
historical return, and close to that is the multi-beta
CAPM, which is another name for the APT.

The choice of the pricing methodology
differs systematical across firms.
Large firms, public firms, low leverage firms
are more likely to use CAPM.
When it comes to the multifactor extensions of the CAPM,
the most common additional factors
tend to target foreign exchange rates, interest rates, GDP
risk, and inflation risk.
Large firms tend to focus on the foreign exchange risk
factors, which is intuitive, as these firms are more
likely to have global operations with cash flows exposed
to exchange rate fluctuations.
Small firms tend to favor interest rate
risk in their models.
As we see from the survey, CAPM is the leading model
of the cost of capital despite its empirical limitations.
There could be several reasons for this.
In capital budgeting, firms value projects.
In this context, one needs to forecast discount rates
over long horizons.
Most of the empirical valuations of CAPM
come from applying the model to rebalanced equity portfolios.
Firms tend to move relatively quickly across such portfolios,
which means that the CAPM alphas one finds for a given firm tend
to be transient.
They tend to apply over a short period, a few quarters, or even
a few months after portfolio construction
and do not extend into the future.
Quantitatively, such violations are
relatively minor when it comes to long horizon forecasts
of the discount rates.
This is not to say that CAPM works perfectly.
But we need to evaluate pros and cons of alternative models
with a particular set of applications in mind.
To quote George Box, a famous statistician,
all models are wrong, but some are useful.
