
PROFESSOR: Hi, everyone.
Welcome to our webinar.
I wanted to use this opportunity to discuss
some of the issues related to CAPM, and some of the ideas
that maybe go a little beyond the scope of the course,
and also to respond to some of your questions.
I had a few things in mind when we started playing the webinar.
But then we got a bunch of very good questions.
So at the end, we decided to go through the questions
other than some of the prepared material.
Although, that's still coming at the end of this hour.
And what I did is I basically copied some of the questions
and merged them with some light editing.
Because a few of you were asking about similar things.
So what you're going to see is not
literally copy/paste, but an edited version
of the questions.
So with that said, let me get started.
We'll jump right into it.

OK, so let's begin with the issues of CAPM implementation.
So the first set of questions was about the choice
of the benchmark.
What are the implications of the benchmark
used as the market portfolio to implement CAPM?
For example, a multi-asset benchmark,
or is the geographic focus in the benchmark?
So this is a very good question.
Logically speaking, when we think
about what the market portfolio is,
that's the portfolio held by the investors.
And there is no reason to limit it to just equities.
Equities are a part of the portfolio.
But that's not the whole.
And it's not even the largest part.
There are other asset classes there.
We have obviously fixed income securities, bonds.
We have real estate.
Some people would argue even human capital.
And when you add all of that up, it's
a lot larger than the stock market.
Now, there has been some academic work exploring
these alternative benchmarks.
And there does seem to be some additional information coming
from other asset classes.
But at the end of the day, there are some practical issues
that we have to contend with, which
is that data coming from equity markets
is available at high frequency.
It's precisely measured.
Prices are precisely measured.
And so we can estimate betas.
It's very important to have the right alignment of timing
when you estimate betas.
So for that reason, the equity markets, of course,
are very convenient to use.
And they do capture a lot of information
about what happens in the investor's portfolio more
broadly, even though it may be a small fraction in terms
of the dollar value.
But then in other asset classes, if you
think about corporate bonds, or real estate, or even
human capital, the less liquid they are,
the harder they are to use.
And in particular, when you want to estimate betas,
it's actually pretty tricky when your portfolio
includes illiquid securities.
Because you don't measure the value very well.
You certainly cannot measure precisely at high frequency.
So for that reason, these efforts,
they couldn't gain a lot of traction.
And so now in practice people use equity portfolios.
But I would say that with the advent of ETFs,
we have more and more information
about market valuation of those less liquid assets.
And so there may be some updates to that,
so that going forward you may see
more acceptance of using other asset classes
as a part of the benchmark.
Now, the second set of questions is
about estimation of parameters.
So how do we estimate the parameters?
What do we do about various issues,
for example, risk-free rate?
Do we use historical rates, or spot rates?
What do we do about maturities?
What about the market risk premiums, same thing,
use historical or implicit market risk premium?
And then there was a question about possible approaches
to increase the accuracy of the market risk premium.
Basically, you have a lot of volatility going back,
including volatile interest rates.
So they use historical returns that are backward looking.
What do you do?
So now, let's unpack that.
Interest rates, obviously, vary across maturities.
Short rate and long rates are different.
So which ones do we use?
What do we do about it, historical or spot?
Let's think about the underlying principles.
CAPM is supposed to give us a relation
between expected returns going forward
and some measures of risk.
So inputs, like interest rates or a market risk premium,
ideally we want forward looking inputs.
We want to have a number that represents the interest
rate going forward or the expected market
return going forward.
Now, in case of interest rates, we actually
have market information we can use.
So that's pretty convenient.
So we can use spot rates.
So there I would say the answer is
as you are estimating the cost of capital, for example,
you plug in the current interest rates, the spot rates.
Historical rates are useful as a part of estimation
of the market risk premium.
When you go back and look at the historical data,
you compare market returns to the spot rates
in the past that are matched with the market
returns in time.
And you'll take the difference.
That's your excess return.
And you estimate the average excess return.
So that could be your estimate of the risk premium.
But when you apply the CAPM, when
you use it to project expected returns going forward,
you use the spot rate.
Now, what about maturities?
That gets kind of interesting.
It depends on the context, depends on the application.
CAPM is a static model.
It's describing the market over a single period.
The market that we operate in is not static.
It's dynamic.
It has multiple periods.
So that's one of the limitations of CAPM.
We're going to come back to that.
What do we do about it?
Well, essentially, it's a handicap of the model.
It's a static model.
And you have to somehow apply it.
So you need some additional maybe ad hoc steps.
You need some additional decisions.
And they, of course, are context specific.
So for example, if you're using CAPM
to evaluate portfolio managers.
You're trying to understand, are they able to beat the market?
Are they generating an alpha?
Or if you are using a CAPM for short horizon event studies,
where you are talking about events
that unravel on a scale of days or weeks,
then it makes a lot of sense to use a short term interest rate.
And that's going to correspond to the horizon over which
you're evaluating various investment strategies or market
events.
When you're using CAPM for capital budgeting,
that's different.
Because very often, these real investment projects
have longer horizons.
It could be that the half life of these cash flows
is five or 10 years.
So in that case, it's very common
to use long term interest rates as the risk free rate.
It's as if when you're applying CAPM
you're saying that my time period, CAPM, is
silent about what that is physically.
But let's say my time period is five years.
It's not one month.
It's five years.
So then you're going to plug in say a five-year interest rate,
spot rate.
All right, what about the market risk premium?
Well, that turns out to be also kind of tricky, right?
We can, of course, measure the historical risk premium.
But is that a good estimate of the expected excess market
return going forward?
Well, there are reasons to believe that it might not
be, it may be biased.
We have lived through an unusual period of history.
And one could argue that the US economy was kind of lucky
and had a very good run, and that going forward,
average returns may be lower, the risk premium may be lower.
Perhaps there is that argument.
Also, the environment has changed.
It is much easier to diversify now than it used to be.
Transaction costs are lower.
So all of these frictions are now lower.
And that also affects the measured risk premium
in the market.
So for that reason, there are good arguments
for using the implied risk premium, the implicit market
risk premium.
We have seen in Fin one how to do that, right?
You have to start with some kind of pricing model,
like the Gordon Growth Model.
And then you plug in estimates of growth rates of cash flows
and dividends.
And you back out the implied value
of the market expected return.
You compare it to interest rates.
You could get a risk premium.
So that is a possibility.
And if you look at the actual applications of CAPM,
people use both.
It's good to have a few different angles of attack
and compare the results.
So using implied risk premium makes a lot of sense.
And I would certainly try that myself.
Because just looking at the realized average
historical return is not the best way
to estimate expected returns going forward.
It's very much one path of history.
It's not the expected return.
It's the realized average return.
Now, to increase the accuracy of the market risk premium,
we talked about this just now, basically,
using implied numbers is going to help.
Essentially you want to extend your data sample
as much as possible.
But there are limits to that.
You could go further back.
But then it's further back.
It's a different period of history.
You can look cross-sectional to see
if the numbers from other markets kind of line up
and support your estimates.
But essentially, there is limited ability
to increase precision of that estimate.
Because it's ultimately based on one part of history.
But I would say that using implied numbers in addition
to historical averages definitely
is a useful strategy.

Now, let's talk about the limitations of CAPM.
So CAPM is widely used in practice.
Many firms apply it.
The majority of firms, particularly large firms,
use CAPM in capital budgeting, for example.
It's used a lot in performance evaluation as well.
So what are the practical limitations?
There are many.
Obviously, it's a model, a stylized model.
One limitation we already brought up.
CAPM is a static model.
And you have to take some additional somewhat
ad hoc steps to apply it, so a dynamic setting.
Other limitations are that the premise is based
on pretty strong assumptions.
It's about frictionless markets.
And in the actual markets, you may have frictions.
You may have market segmentation.
Not all investors are invested in all markets or securities.
You could have transaction costs or limited liquidity of assets,
meaning that when you trade them, actually
you move prices by trading.
So that trading itself is costly.
It doesn't have enough impact on prices.
And CAPM assumes all of that away.
So that's something to be aware of.
So CAPM is expected to work better
for securities that are liquid and that are broadly held.
And it's not going to work just on first principles
for securities that are illiquid and where participation
is limited.

Now, how can you apply CAPM to firms at an early stage?
Well, if you recall, it depends, of course,
on the context from this question is unclear.
Are we talking about basically thinking
about equity of these firms or capital budgeting?

So I just see a question.
So when we talk about liquidity, we're not talking about cash.
We're talking about ease of trading, ability
to trade securities without moving their prices.
So for example, large stocks, you
can buy them in large quantities without moving prices.
But small stocks, like GameStop, something
like that, you could move prices by trading somewhat easily.
So it's that kind of trading liquidity.
So now, if you are thinking about the context of, say,
estimating alphas of equity, then it
doesn't matter if the firm is young or not.
It's just that you want to have enough historical data
to estimate betas, that kind of stock.
But if you're thinking about capital budgeting,
then keep in mind that when we evaluate projects,
we evaluate projects.
It doesn't matter if the firm is young or old.
You want to evaluate the project itself.
And you want to look at the comparables.
So that's one caveat.
So in that sense, it may be a somewhat traditional kind
of common situation.
It doesn't matter that the firm is early stage.
However, having said that, early stage firms
are somewhat different, because of the high level
of idiosyncratic risk and the high probability of failure
relative to large, established firms.
And so what that means is that it's not so much about CAPM
per se.
It's about the overall approach to capital budgeting,
that maybe you want to take that kind of risk into account.
And that means that when you project cash flows,
you have to think about default risk,
that some of these cash flows may not be materialized.
Essentially you have these types of non-linearities
that arise due to the volatile nature and the high default
risk of the firm, that it may just go out of business
and not be able to implement the project to the end.
So the keyword here is real options.
You want to think about evaluating projects
with this kind of option-like structure in mind.
And we're not going to go deeper into that.
But this is forthcoming.
You're going to see a lecture on real options in this course.
And then you'll learn more about it.
So just kind of file that away.
But when you're thinking about these sort
of very non-linear situations, early stage
firms, or multi-stage projects, and whatnot, then
you have this important first order
effect coming from optionality.
And then, of course, it's not really about
how you compute the discount rate.
It's about how do you use discount rate in that kind
of non-linear setting?
OK, now the question is, does CAPM
work for financial markets outside of the US?
And what are the features of such markets,
where CAPM breaks down?
So here, evidence is somewhat mixed.
In the developed markets that are similar to the US market,
CAPM works better.
So if you think about UK, or some large European markets,
or Australia, then CAPM is a better approximation
in other places.
Although, it's not great.
Even in the US, it's not great.
But when you move to emerging markets, for example,
their evidence is much more problematic.
And it looks like CAPM doesn't work very well.
And then they say, what are the features there?
Why is it breaking down more for these types
of emerging markets other than established developed markets?
And that has to do a lot with market constraints
and frictions.
I will mention just a couple.
One is liquidity.
In emerging markets, very often assets have limited liquidity.
It means that they're hard to trade.
And that becomes a first order feature.
And the other issue is limited market participation.
There is market segmentation, essentially.
That world markets are not perfectly integrated.
And so when you're thinking about how
CAPM would apply in the local market,
it's kind of a delicate issue.
Because some of the investors are local.
And they may or may not be limited to the local market.
Some of them may have access to the global market.
Some of the investors are coming from abroad.
So if you ask, is there a reason why local market would
be mean very insufficient?
Not really, right?
Because the arguments of CAPM break down.
You don't have a population of these mean various optimizers
all holding the same portfolio.
So it has to be the local market.
You have different types of investors, local, domestic,
or foreign holding different portfolios.
So the bottom line is that the assumptions of CAPM
don't hold very well.
There are frictions.
There are constraints on who is able to participate in what
securities.
And because of that, theoretically, you
wouldn't expect CAPM to hold in that environment.
And empirically, it looks like it doesn't.
So what people find is evidence that there
are other factors that are useful in addition
to the market factor, however you define that.
And so if you look at some super versions of the APT model
in the context of emerging markets,
there are additional factors that seem to be priced.
And these would be things like small stock factor
or some proxy for market liquidity.
That one is particularly important.
So you could use, for example, a world portfolio.
There's like a world CAPM using a global portfolio of stocks.
But in addition to that, if you use a liquidity factor,
that liquidity factor seems to pick up
a variation in average returns that just exposure to the world
markets doesn't fully describe.

So the next question is, what additions one
should consider to apply CAPM or APT in developing countries?
So it's again, as I said, I would look at the exposure
to liquidity shocks.
But ultimately, it's not the whole story, right?
Because when you have an environment
with limited ability to trade securities, imperfect markets,
our framework starts breaking down, this frictions framework.
And even idiosyncratic risk of securities
may matter if the investors in these companies
are not well diversified.
So I would essentially look at all of these possibilities.
I would look at the pricing of idiosyncratic risk.
Is there evidence that that matters?
I would definitely look at the additional APT style
factors, that proxy for liquidity conditions,
and not just exposure to the broad market.
So I don't have a simple answer to this question.
Because it's not a simple question.
There is academic work in this area.
But it's very much ongoing.
So we don't have well-established answers
to these questions.
But we have some tools we could use to make progress.
It's just that this is not finished strand of work.
It's in progress.

The last question on this page is the following.
So my understanding is that CAPM is widely
adopted because of its effectiveness
and easy implementation.
But finance is becoming more and more data driven.
Will there be other models that could compete with the CAPM
the near future?
And what are the latest developments in this area?
So it's certainly true that there
is a lot of movement, a lot of progress,
in bringing in new types of data, big data, AI,
machine learning into finance.
So I would say that these are the most active new lines
of work in terms of new developments.
Would these things displace CAPM and similar models?
It depends on the context.
Again, for the purposes of capital budgeting,
it's not clear that the result of change.
But in the context of capital markets,
when you're think about forecasting expected returns,
then yes, there absolutely.
We are learning a lot, particularly at short horizons.
These models, of course, they have their limitations.
And these limitations get exposed with richer data
that is now being used.
And so people use unstructured data,
like text, which they can now process automatically.
They use spatial images to quantify economic activity.
They go to Twitter and look at the sentiment indicators there.
So there's a lot of stuff like that going on.
And it does improve our ability to forecast cash flows
in the short run, to identify certain kinds of market
inefficiency that may have existed before.
Of course, once you identify them using these techniques,
they quickly can get arbitraged away.
But I would say that that's where a lot of action is.
And what that means is that when you're
thinking about using a model to evaluate investment strategies,
then there is a lot more you could
bring to the table in addition to this kind of exposure
to the common risk factors.
You could use various kinds of signals, from characteristics,
and other less structured signals from the news
flow to predict returns.
So that's where a lot of development is taking place.
Again, it's in the context of investment management, trading.
But in capital budgeting, I don't
think there is a lot of change so far.
But we'll see what we're going to learn
over the next decade or two.
But in the short run, it seems like long horizons.
We have our traditional tools.
There isn't much new that we're getting from this kind of data
intensive approach.

CAPM versus APT.
I would like to hear more detail about CAPM versus APT
and how it fits in today's financial firms.

Basically, another question I'm facing yet again,
how is CAPM applied to firms at an early stage?
So essentially, these are all connected.
There are many contexts where CAPM is not sufficient
and it makes sense to introduce other factors.
And so an early stage firm, which
may be exposed to shocks to financing constraints, which
doesn't have easy access to financial markets
like a large established firm would,
it makes sense to think about additional factors, not just
liquidity factor, ease of trading that we already
mentioned, but also perhaps, credit conditions, sort
of general proxies for ease of funding.
So CAPM versus APT, I mean, we talked about it
during the lecture.
Essentially, CAPM is a good framework
for thinking about systematic versus idiosyncratic risk.
As we have seen, in terms of its raw performance,
there are limitations.
So in some contexts, like when you evaluate performance
of trading strategies, it makes a lot of sense
to use multifactor versions.
So there APT brings to the table more precise descriptions
of systematic risk.
Let's see.
Let's say measuring performance of portfolio managers,
you would want to use factors in addition to the market,
maybe to capture the exposure to a particular style,
different kinds of risks they may be picking up.
But in the context of capital budgeting,
people have been kind of careful introducing other factors.
Because as you do that, you're kind of mixing noise
with the signal.
And if exposure to these other factors is not very stable,
then they're not very reliable for making long term forecasts
of discount rates for projects.
So in that context, CAPM actually is pretty widely used.
And it's just a practical consideration.
If we could come up with a reliable, robust, better model,
it would get adopted.
We haven't seen that yet.
But APT is a strong contender.
Because it does bring additional elements to the table
that simple CAPM, which is based on very strong assumptions,
may be missing.
Does CAPM work for financial markets outside of the US?
We already discussed that.
It does work better in the developed markets.
And it is not as successful, it doesn't work as well
in developing economies.
And basically, the features of the markets
are essentially how close they seem
to be to our idealized assumptions.
Do they look like they're more or less frictionless?
Is that a good assumption?
Is investor participation unconstrained?
Do radical changes in money supply
have implications for CAPM?
Or is it othogonal because the entire market
is exposed to any effects?
So that's asked and answered to some degree.
Shocks to money supply are going to affect the broad market.
And under CAPM assumptions, that doesn't create a second factor.
That just gets priced through the market.
So in the CAPM framework, you would have that taking place.
We don't explicitly acknowledge essentially
what moves the market, right?
We are agnostic.
But monetary supply shocks would be among the shocks.
And they're priced through the exposure to the market.
In reality, if you think that CAPM is an approximation,
would it be that shocks to money supply
create departures from CAPM.
You may want to have an additional risk factor
capture in that.
I would say as a hypothesis, this
is a perfectly reasonable hypothesis to entertain.
I don't have an empirical answer to that.
You have to analyze it.
But my hunch is that at least in some segments of the market,
monetary policy shocks are going to be priced directly,
not just through the market.
So there's going to be a second factor.
And the reason for that is that ultimately, money supply does
affect liquidity in the market.
It's not the market kind of liquidity,
like transaction costs.
But it's more like funding liquidity,
ease of obtaining funding, and gaining leverage, and whatnot.
All of that is going to be affected by monetary policy
shocks.
And for securities where their investors
are relying on ability to lever up, that's going to matter.
So that's my --
call it educated guess.
But I would guess that monetary policy
shocks would be priced, in addition to the market
exposure.
But it's a conjecture.
And you can dig through the literature and see.
Someone must have looked into it already.
But there is more content too.
The trouble with doing this, the challenge,
is that we don't have a huge historical sample.
Essentially, monetary policy is evolving over time as a policy.
And that, of course, affects how these shocks are priced
in the financial markets.
We don't have a huge amount of data.
But nonetheless, for first principles,
it would seem like it will be priced.
On the theme of CAPM versus APT, someone suggested a video,
this is a lecture by Andrew Lo talking about derivation
of CAPM from a single factor APT based on Steve Ross's paper.
If you're curious, I encourage you to take a look.
This was the memorial lecture for Steve Ross
that we held here at MIT.
It covers several interesting topics.
And I thought the presentations were very good.
So you could see kind of the broad cross-section of topics
related to Steve's work, both in asset
pricing and corporate finance.
So then based on that observation, here's
the question.
In this derivation, there are not assumptions
that we have made in the derivation of CAPM.
It's purely based on the arbitrage argument.
Then why do we say that CAPM is an equilibrium model
and not that it's a special case of multifactor APT?
Well, let me remind you that we actually
made the same observation in Fin II, right?
When we derived the CAPM, we did notice
that it looks exactly like one factor APT.
So that's the observation that Andrew is making.
It's identical.
Essentially, this doesn't establish the CAPM.
Because it simply points out that if you have a one factor
structure in the APT framework, you're
going to end up with the same pricing equation
as you obtain if you follow CAPM assumptions.
If you don't have a one factor structure in the APT framework,
then you don't.
By the way, in the one factor APT structure,
you have to do some work, actually,
some additional stuff to convince yourself
that factor and the market portfolio are the same thing.
That may not necessarily follow.
So there is a lot of kind of slippage there.
But nonetheless-- so mathematically, one factor APT
and CAPM look the same.
But of course, they're based on different assumptions.
There is nothing in the APT framework
that says that you have to have a single factor.
The whole reason why Steve introduced this model
is to allow for multiple risk factors.
And the empirical evidence is that there are multiple risk
factors.
So why do we say that CAPM is an equilibrium model?
Well, it is based on certain assumptions
about investor behavior.
So we're basically saying that if investors
are mean variance optimizers, then
using equilibrium arguments, we can show
that the CAPM formula holds.
Can we achieve the same result using arbitrage arguments?
Starting from the same assumptions, no.
You cannot start with the mean variance assumptions,
use arbitrage arguments, and derive the CAPM formula.
So APT argument, arbitrage argument,
starts from strong statistical assumptions, single factor
structure, and then derives the same formula.
So it's basically different initial assumptions,
different arguments, same result in one special case.
In that sense, CAPM is very different from APT.
Do equilibrium and arbitrage conditions
coincide in this case?
So the conditions themselves, of course, don't coincide.
They have very different meaning.
Equilibrium simply says that supply equals demand.
For every share bought, someone must have sold it.
So that's sort of just a feature of reality.
Arbitrage conditions tell you that there is no free lunch.
And that's a very different property of the market.
In this particular case, you end up
with the same pricing formula.
But in other respects, these economies, of course,
are very different.
So in general, CAPM and APT are not the same.
You add the second factor.
And they basically are going to generally look different.
CAPM doesn't need to hold in the APT framework.
All right, this brings us the following question.
Given that this is MIT, why was Intertemporal Capital Asset
Pricing Model, ICAPM, of Robert Merton not discussed?
Should a person of finance delve deeper into CAPM extensions?
Or is the base theory fundamentally sufficient?
It's a very good question.
As it happens, I teach three different courses at MIT.
And I discuss Bob Martin's ICAPM in two of them,
two out of three.
And the one where we don't cover it is the foundations course.
Because ICAPM is a somewhat advanced model.
Should one go deeper into extensions of CAPM?
Yeah, if you want to learn more about finance, of course.
Again, this is an introductory course.
I wouldn't tell you that what we cover here is sufficient.
The reality is that it's an open field, right?
It's a very complex subject in a sense
that once you go to the boundary of our knowledge,
there's a lot more stuff still to be uncovered.
So nothing is sufficient.
Should ICAPM be a part of the toolbox
if you want to be a finance professional?
Yes.
Should it be in the introductory course?
Typically, it's not because of the overhead required.
Having said that, let me tell you a few things about ICAPM.
So ICAPM is mathematical, equivalent to APT,
if you look at the formula.
It basically says that if you look
at the risk premium of any security,
you could express it as the following.
It's going to be beta of the security on the market
times the market risk premium plus
some additional components, which
look like betas on some other factors
different from the market, times their risk premium.
So these R bar K, they are expected returns
on the factor-mimicking portfolios.

Now, mathematically it looks the same.
Should we say that ICAPM is redundant,
is just a special case of APT?
Well, it's kind of the same thing as with CAPM, right?
The formula looks the same.
But assumptions are different.
And the meaning of the formula is not exactly the same.
So the mimicking portfolios, what factors do they mimic?
That's kind of the key question.
APT is silent about that.
It will tell you that whatever factors show up
in the factor structure of returns,
that's what's going to drive the risk premium.
But it doesn't tell you which factors
are supposed to drive the perception of returns
in that factor model ratio.
ICAPM is actually specific about the nature of these factors.
ICAPM says that these are portfolios that mimic shocks
to investment opportunities.
What are investment opportunities?
They are essentially things like interest rates,
expected returns, volatility.
It's kind of anything that describes the distribution
of returns on the totality of assets
in the market going forward.

So that's different from APT, right?
So now you think about, well, what
about these macro shocks, shocks to output, oil price, this
and that?
Well, they are going to be a part of ICAPM
only if these shocks correspond to changes
in investment opportunities in the financial markets.
So the content of the factors is not the same.
Now, let's talk a bit more about the intuition of ICAPM.
Why is this the case?
Why are we saying that these additional price
factors have to be shocks to investment opportunities?
Now, to derive it rigorously, we need a couple
of advanced mathematical tools.
The original derivation used dynamic programming.
This is optimization method for multivariate problems
and use stochastic calculus.
Stochastic calculus is also, of course,
the basis for option pricing in continuous time.
So it has these two ingredients.
And we don't have space in the introductory class
to cover both of them.
Because they take quite a bit of time to develop.
So we are going to barge into it without the mathematical tools
and just talk about the intuition.
I think that we can gain a lot of insight
without deriving it formally.
Let's consider the following motivating example, instead of
the mathematical derivation.
Alice is an investor.
Let's say she is highly risk averse, make it real simple.
And she's facing a market with two securities only.
They are two bonds, risk-free bonds, default free bonds.
One bond has a horizon of one year.
And the other one has a horizon of 20 years.
And they are both discount bonds.
So the way it's going to go is that at time zero
she has these two bonds available, one and 20 years.
And then a year later, the 20 year bond
is going to have 19 years left to maturity.
And then 18 years is going to kind
of shrink, approach maturity.
And the one year bond, of course,
is going to mature after the first year.
Then you can roll over.
Each year you have a new one year treasury bond available.
OK, so that's the market.
Now, let's consider two hypotheticals.
Suppose that Alice has a one year horizon.
How will she invest?
Well, I would say that because she is so highly risk averse,
she is going to invest 100% of her portfolio
in a one year bond.
Why is that?
Because over a one year horizon, a 20 year bond is risky.
We don't know at what price you'll
be able to sell it a year from now,
when the bond has 19 years left to go.
So that's interest rate risk that we talked about in Fin I,
right?
Long duration bond has interest rate risk.
One year bond, risk-free.
You know exactly what you're going to get one year from now.
A risk-free investment is what a highly risk averse
investor is going to pick.
Fine, so that's simple enough.
Now, what if Alice has a 20 year horizon?
How will she invest then?
Well, at the 20 year horizon, things flip.
Now, a 20 year bond is risk-free.
Because you know exactly what the bond
is going to pay 20 years from now.
What about the one year bond?
Well, if you buy a one year bond at time zero,
and then you roll over the next year, and then roll over again,
you don't know the future spot interest rates.
So you're going to keep rolling over.
And your ultimate portfolio value would be random.
It will depend on the path of interest rates.
So with a 20 year horizon, the notion of a safe asset
changed, right?
Now, a 20 year bond is safe.
And this kind of strategy of buying one year bond is risky.
So as an aside, this brings up a very important notion
that what constitutes a safe asset differs across investors.
In this particular example, it differs in relation
to the investment horizon.
But there could be other dimensions of differences.
So that is very important.
Because sometimes it's how would people think about safe asset?
They think a Treasury bond.
But that's very narrow.
That's only for a particular class of investors.
OK, so we concluded that this risk averse investor
is going to hold 100% of her portfolio in the 20 year bond.
Because that asset gives a safe payoff 20 years later.

What about the short term volatility
of the 20 year bond, right?
She is highly risk averse.
Why is she taking on this kind of volatility?
Well, here is the thing.
With a long investment horizon, this kind of short term
mean and volatility of returns is not the whole story.
Think about from Alice's point of view.
If the 20 year bond drops over the next year,
is that a big problem?
Well, if she had to liquidate at that time,
it would be a problem.
But she's going to hold that bond to maturity.
So if the bond price falls after the first year, what that means
is that the rate of returns from that point until maturity
is going to be higher.

And things kind of cancel out.
So when the bond price declines, future returns are better.
What this highlights is a particular special case
of the general notion that changes
in investment opportunities matter, in addition to shocks
to the portfolio value.
So if I have a long horizon as an investor,
I don't just care about the mean and the variance
of my portfolio return over the short horizon.
I also care about, how will I be able to reinvest my money
after the first period?
I care about the investment opportunities
I will be facing at the end of the first period.
More than that, I care about the joint distribution
of my portfolio return and my investment opportunities.
In this case, this 20 year bond has the property
that bond returns are perfectly correlated with changes
in investment opportunities negatively.
The bond price falls, gives you a low or negative return.
In the state of the world where future interest
rates are higher, investment opportunities are better.
And vise versa, the bond price rises in value
when future interest rates are lower.
So this illustrates the notion that for a long horizon
investor, the short term mean variance objective is not
right.
There are going to be other considerations
in their objective.
And here we have to essentially take it
on faith it's coming from dynamic programming.
These other considerations have to do
with the value of investment opportunities
together will develop the portfolio.
So when it's all said and done, we
end up with the I-CAPM calculation
that tells you that the risk premium on every security
is based on the market data and the market risk premium.
And on top of that, it's exposure to the shocks
to investment opportunities times the risk
premium of these shocks.
And so these mimicking portfolios,
they're called hedging portfolios.
These are portfolios of traded securities that
best approximate or hedge shocks to investment opportunities.
In case of long term interest rates, this would be bonds.
In case of other dimensions of investment opportunities,
it's other securities or portfolios of securities.
So that's ICAPM.
So at the end of the day, if you're going to ICAPM,
it's going to look almost indistinguishable
from using APT, except ICAPM requires more discipline
in the choice of factors.
You have to use factors that respond to shocks to investment
opportunities.

Now, let me go back to the following result, which
we had in the course.
This is the failure of CAPM.
This is actually one of the more problematic failures of CAPM.
The security market line is pretty flat, right?
So this is not a new result. It was first
observed by Mike Jensen, Fischer Black, and Myron Schultz.
In 1972, they did some empirical analysis.
They published a paper about a very well known paper
that documented this kind of failure of CAPM.
And then recently, there was a resurgence
of interest in this result. People reestablished it again.
And this made it into the space of quant trading strategists.
Now if you're interested in things like smart beta
strategies, people talk about betting against beta
or low risk strategies.
This is going to be based on this idea
that it appears that low beta stocks earn pretty high returns
compared to the market risk.
And their average returns are not
very different from high beta stocks.
So if you buy a low beta stocks and you lever up
and you short high beta stocks, you get rid of market risk.
You have an alpha left.
So this looks like a problem for the CAPM.
If you take these results at face value,
then it's definitely an issue.
Now, Fischer Black made the following observation.
So this is his picture here.
This is not my observation.
This is his.
And of course, he is Fischer Black
from the Black, Schultz, Merton fame.
And he was one of the most influential thinkers
in finance.
And of course, on our faculty at MIT.
So he basically said that if you look at these results
and you see that CAPM fails, that actually is even more
interesting than if it worked.
So it doesn't mean that beta is useless.
It actually makes very useful.
And think about the following possibility.
Suppose that you are a firm which
has pretty unrestricted access to the bond market,
to financial markets.
You can raise money.
You could lever up if you want.
Well, what you can do then is invest
in low risk projects, which have these high discount rates.
So they are basically cheap, low price, high discount rate.
And then you lever up and then sell equity to the market.
So what happens?

You are able to generate money by levering up by doing that,
right?
Because as you lever up, your required rate of return
doesn't seem to rise much, right?
So you take a project that has a beta of 0.5.
And then you use that to finance half of it
and finance half of it with equity, right?
And then you sell the whole thing to the market.
Now your beta is not 0.5.
Now that you used debt to finance, your beta of equity
is one, right?
If half of it is debt, half of it is equities,
you sell equity to the market.
Beta is one.
Normal would say, well, then you risk
premium is going to go up by a factor of two.
So there is an arbitrage there, right?
But in this case, if you believe this relation,
that's not going to happen.
Your risk premium doesn't go up.
So there is arbitrage.
You can basically make money, increase the value of the firm,
by using leverage.
Now, you're going to learn about M&M proposition, Modigliani
and Miller, another product of MIT finance group.
This was Franco Modigliani's contribution,
one of his contributions.
And that's going to tell you the exact opposite, that it's
impossible to increase the value of the enterprise using
leverage.
Because there is no free lunch.
If you replace some of the equity
financing with debt financing, yeah,
that has lower discount rates.
But you're going to make your equity more risky.
And then the cost of capital and equity is going to go up.
And so when you look at the weighted average, which
is the discount rate for the whole firm,
that does not change.
It cannot change.
You're just kind of splitting cash flows between debt
and equity.
But the properties of the whole don't change.
So if you take this graph at its face value,
then it violates the M&M proposition.
And there is arbitrage in the market.
So basically, what Fischer Black was
saying that either these firms that can lever up
would be able to take advantage of that.
And they can invest in low risk projects
and use a lot of leverage to make money out of it.
Or maybe this relation actually doesn't quite apply.
Or firms don't have access to easy funding in the bond
market.
But essentially, this is either some kind
of market failure in terms of constraints
in the financial market.
Or it's an opportunity for firms.
But in either case, if the firms were able to lever up, then
even though this is how equity is priced,
when the firms look at projects, they would use CAPM.
Because they understand that low risk project
it actually is not cheap.
It's going to give them positive NTV.
They can figure out the true value
of using the CAPM formula.
Because that's going to take into
account their ability to lever up and sell equity
to the market.
So that's kind of the observation.
Now what is the flaw in that argument?
Well, of course, Fisher was very aware of that.
He's essentially playing devil's advocate here,
saying that if you take this relation
as a stable structural relation, then
you're going to have those types of interesting effects.
But the flaw in this argument is that just because empirical
and some high beta stocks and low beta stocks
tend to have similar average returns,
doesn't mean that if you take a lower beta project
and you lever it up, your discount rate is not
going to rise.
Because this is not of structural relation.
It's like this is about calculations.
And when you start levering up and you
expect to move along this blue line on average,
then you think it's a causal relation.
That doesn't follow.
OK?
So it could be that when you simply apply leverage, then
your CAPM relation holds very well.
Because otherwise, there is arbitrage.
If you just apply leverage, then you double your risk,
you double your expected excess return.
But when you look across firms, what happens
is that there are these firms on the right with high beta.
They are different from firms on the left,
not just in terms of the market beta.
But something else is different about it.
So if you live in the multifactor world,
then what you're seeing is differences in market betas.
But you don't see differences in other factors.
And that could potentially explain why the security market
line is flat.
Because you are missing other factors.
That's an explanation potentially.
So let's look at that.
Again, to recap, people came up with arguments
trying to explain this kind of relation of the data.
And the arguments rely on things like constraints.
They basically said that if investors are constrained
in terms of leverage, they are going to essentially undervalue
these low beta stocks.
Because they cannot get sufficiently high levels
of return from them.
They would like high beta stocks.
Because it's a substitute for leverage.
But firms that have access to leverage,
they can take advantage of that.
And they use a lot of leverage together with low risk
investments to make money.
So that's kind of the argument on the supply side.
That firms can arbitrage this way.
But what I want to pursue now is the alternative line,
which is that we have missing factors at play potentially
and that this is just a partial picture of risk.
So I will walk you quickly through an exercise.
This is based on my own paper with my former student,
Dimitris Papanikolaou.

He's now on faculty at Yale.
So he's a colleague more than a student now.
But we looked at the following issue in relation
to the flat security market line and other effects.
So the issue is the following.
If you look at the differences in average accounts
across firms, you could see that they're not fully captured
by the CAPM beta.
There are other dimensions.
And in particular, firm characteristics
can predict returns.
And also, you could come up with these long short portfolios,
kind of like with Fama and French
did, sold stocks on market to bulk or on size,
and create additional factors.
And these factors are priced.
And they're not spent by the market portfolio.
So that's a general observation.
And let me show you a few motivating results.
So here, we're going to replicate a few of these
examples of the failure of CAPM.
So here is one, market beta.
This is a representation as a table of the picture.
It says that let's sort stocks on their market beta
from low beta to high beta.
And let's look at their average excess returns
and see how CAPM is able to explain them.
So what you see is historical.
This is for a period from 1965 to 2008.
The low beta firms compared to high beta firms
have pretty similar returns.
They may be slightly higher.
But that's statistical and not distinguishable.
And essentially, it's a flat security market line.
Of course, betas are very different.
For the low beta firms, beta is .7 on average.
The high beta firms it's almost 1.5.
So the expected returns are similar.
Betas are very different.
And that means that CAPM doesn't describe these average returns.
There is a violation.
There is a CAPM alpha.
So if you look at the high beta firms versus low beta firms,
and you create a long short portfolio, where
you go along high beta firms and your short dollar for dollar
low beta firms, what you find is a negative CAPM alpha, right?
And if you take this long short portfolio
and you ask, what kind of systematic risk is in it,
well, this portfolio is very well diversified.
It has lots of securities, basically
20% of the market, so hundreds of securities.
It has some kind of market risk, of course.
If you are aggressive on the market, there is an r-squared.
Why?
Because you're going long on high beta stocks
and short low beta stocks.
So your long short portfolio has a positive market beta of 0.75.
But at the end of the day, the market
explains only a quarter of the variance.
So what is going on?
Idiosyncratic variance should have been diversified away.
But it didn't somehow.
Well, actually, idiosyncratic variance did.
What is left here is some kind of systematic risk factor.
There are other systematic risk factors
that don't get diversified when they go long short.
It's exactly the argument that we applied
when we talked about APT.
So there are other factors here.
We don't know what they are.
But there is evidence that they are there.
Because the r-squared on the market is closer to 0 than to 1
in a well diversified portfolio.
And so then we do the same exercise
for other kinds of sorts.
So here is the sort on the so-called
Tobin's Q. Think of it as an enterprise level
market to book ratio.
It's kind of analogous to the Fama and French market
to book or for equity.
And here again, you see the value
of stocks versus growth stocks have
very different average returns.
Value stocks have high average returns.
Growth stocks have low historical average returns.
The market beta doesn't align with expected returns.
It kind of goes in the wrong direction.
So there is a strong pattern of alphas there.
And again, a long short portfolio, the market
doesn't explain much.
The portfolio itself is pretty volatile, right?
So there's a lot of residual systematic risk,
just not market risk, other kinds of systematic risk.
We do the same for other things.
We sort firms on their past investment.
Very similar, firms that invested a lot versus--
yeah, sorry.
This is firms that invested a little on the left versus firms
that invest a lot on the right have different average returns.
CAPM doesn't explain it.
If you go long short, you have a large CAPM alpha.
Again, a well diversified portfolio
with a lot of residual risk not captured by the market.
You sort on the enterprise level earnings
to price ratio, similar results.
And even on idiosyncratic stock return volatility.
This is stock specific return volatility not captured
by the common factors.
And again, you see that the long shot
portfolio is highly volatile, not captured by the market.
And CAPM fails to describe it.
So all of these facts they point to the limitations of CAPM.
They also point to the existence of additional risk factors.
Otherwise, our long short portfolio
would have very low volatility.
And these outflows would look like arbitrage.
But they don't.
It looks like you have a strategy that
has some kind of average rate of return,
but also has a lot of residual risk.
So then we do the following.
We take all of these five cross-sections of portfolios,
sort it on the market beta on market
to book on past investment, idiosyncratic volatility.
Take all these different cross-sections.
If you look at the composition of these long short portfolios,
high versus low, they all look pretty different.
You don't have a lot of overlapping membership
in these portfolios.
But when they extract the common component of returns
in these cross-sections, this is done
using so-called principal component analysis, when
extract the common source of variation in each of these five
cross-sections, they seem to be strongly related
to each other statistically.
So it looks like each of these cross-sections
has an important common factor.
And these common factors are highly related
across the cross-sections.
So the pairwise correlation is pretty high.
And there is a common factor across all of these five
cross-sections that seem to apply to each of them,
even though mechanically if you look
at the membership in these portfolios,
you don't see such a strong pattern.
So there is a strong statistical relation between them,
a common source of variation.
That starts to sound very much like APT.
Well, so then what we did is we created a second factor, which
is based on the common source of movement
in these 50 portfolios, five sections, 10 portfolios each.
This factor is uncorrelated with the market by construction.
So it's a common source of variation other
than the market.
And it shows up here in the last row.
And what you see is that each of these cross-sections.
It loads strongly on this second component in addition
to the market.
And now when you look at the alphas in this two factor
model, which is the two factor APT model,
alphas shrunk towards zero.
And the key statistics basically show that now they
are no longer significant.
Let me show you the same result graphically.
I'm going to skip this table.
It's a different way of presenting the data.
So here is a graphical illustration of the end.
What's going on?
If you look at the panel on the left,
on the horizontal axis it shows the expected return according
to CAPM-- this is the fitted expected return--
this is the forecast of what expected return should
be if CAPM is the right model.
On the vertical axis, you looked at
the average historical return, realized return.
They are supposed to fall in the 45 degree line subject
to some statistical noise.
But they should align on the 45 degree line.
They don't.
You see that realized return essentially
has almost no relation to the theoretical expected return.
If anything, the relation seems to be almost negative.
Now, if you just see that, you never learned anything else,
you're going to say, well, that looks like a horrible model.
Why would you even bother?
But obviously, these cross-sections
the reason why we're looking at them
is because we learned that they're problematic.
If you do other types of sorts, the CAPM
is going to fare better.
But we found these things that are problematic for CAPM.
They're also related to each other based on some underlying
economics.
So it's not completely random.
So now, when you look at the panel on the right,
here this plots the expected returns, or return forecasts,
using a two factor model.
This is an APT extension.
You have your market component.
And then you have the second factor,
which is our principal component, common source
of variation in these 50 portfolios
other than the market.
That's our factor.
So we estimate the beta of each portfolio
on that factor and use that to predict returns.
And now, it aligns a lot better with the 45 degree line.
There is one portfolio that sticks out.
The rest of them actually align pretty well.
This portfolio that sticks out is the portfolio
of the stocks with the highest level
of idiosyncratic volatility.
And these stocks just have negative returns
on average in sample.
And they're not explained even by this two factor model.
These stocks basically, there are good reasons
to think that they will be mispriced.
Because they are subject to short selling constraints.
So the trading on these stocks is not unconstrained.
They can be easily overpriced, but lower returns.
So what's the bottom line?
There does appear to be a second common factor, at least.
So it's not an accident that the security market was flat, OK?
And this second common component,
it does connect together these different cross-sections
that are based on very different kinds of sorts.
Idiosyncratic volatility sort versus sorting market
to book versus sorting market beta looks all very distinct.
But at the end of the day, they're related.
There is a common underlying source of risk.
OK, so I'm going to stop here.
This is one example of how you go from CAPM to APT,
and how you could make some sense
of these types of relations.
But going back to Fischer Black's observation,
as you invest in the low risk projects and then you lever up,
you're going to end up with something
that looks different from the high beta firms.
And they're going to be different in terms
of the exposure to those additional factors.

This is all I wanted to cover today in terms of my materials.
The handout will be posted.
So you could have it for your reference.
If you have any additional questions,
maybe reach out through the forum.
Otherwise, thank you for your time and keep on going.
There is a lot of exciting stuff to cover in the course.
