
PROFESSOR: The name of the game in pricing interest rate
sensitive derivatives is to model the stochastic properties
of the term structure of interest rates
as accurately as possible, while at the same time
avoiding excessive complexity that
doesn't improve performance but that
slows down computation times.
Many of the models that have been
developed with this goal in mind are continuous time models.
I want to give you a sense of what these models look like
and how they're used for pricing,
but we only have time to scratch the surface of this very
interesting topic and I won't ask you any difficult questions
about it on the final.
A large class of continuous time models for interest rates
are known as one-factor models in the short rate.
In these models, the short rate is, in fact, very short.
It's instantaneous.
That means that it covers an infinitesimally short period
of time.
The general form of this class of models
is described by this equation for the change
in the instantaneous short rate over time.

The change has a deterministic drift term given by a function,
a of rt, and a volatility term parameterized by a function,
sigma of r and t.
The function sigma of r and t is multiplied
by dz, where dz is an increment to a Brownian motion.
You can think of dz as a draw from a standard normal density
function.
Notice that both the drift and the volatility
can depend on the current level of
the instantaneous short rate, r, and current calendar time.
The different models in this class
are distinguished by the specifications that
are chosen for the drift function,
a of rt, and the volatility function, sigma of r and t.
These models are called one-factor models
because the rate change only depends
on a single stochastic shock term.
Some model implementations are based on physical probabilities
but the ones used for pricing are generally
the risk-neutral versions of the models.
Like the short rate models that we've been looking at,
because the models have implications
for bond prices of any possible maturity,
the entire term structure of interest rates
at any future point in time is also implicit in the model.
These one-factor models generally
bear the name of the researchers that first proposed them.
The reason that no major new models in this class
have been proposed in the last 30 years
is that all the possible variations
are pretty much covered by these existing models.
Since that time, though, interest
has shifted to continuous time models of the forward rate
curve rather than models of the instantaneous spot rates.
Those forward rate models are much more
complicated to understand and you can get the basic idea
from the one-factor models so for today, I'm
going to stick to these.
The whole textbook, though, is a good place
to look if you're interested in learning more
about the more complex models for forward rates,
which include the Heath, Jarrow, and Morton model and the LIBOR
market model.
One of the most famous one-factor models
is the Cox-Ingersoll-Ross model, or CIR for short.
That model sets the drift to be mean reverting,
so that if the current instantaneous rate, r, is
above the long-term target rate, b,
the drift tends to be negative.
And if the current rate is below the target rate,
the drift is positive.
That reflects the idea that interest rates usually
stay within some normal range rather
than drifting up or drifting down for a very long time.
The speed of mean reversion is controlled by the choice
of the parameter, alpha.

The volatility is based on a constant parameter, sigma,
multiplied by the square root of the current instantaneous short
rate and by an increment to a Brownian motion, dz.
The purpose of the square root term
is to reduce the variance as the rate gets close to 0.
That has the effect of preventing rates
from going negative, which under many interest rate conditions
is a desirable attribute.
A convenient feature of this model
is that it can be solved to get an equation for the yield curve
in terms of all these parameter values
and the current level of the instantaneous short rate.
You can see the stochastic path that this model generates
and also see how the parameter choices affect the implied
yield curve using the spreadsheet CIR demo
mm.xls, which is included with the class materials.

It's good to know that there's also
a multi-factor version of this model available
that can generate a much richer set of shapes for the yield
curve.
To price options using the CIR model,
or any other continuous time model,
the basic choices are to either use Monte Carlo simulation
or to represent the model in a discretized form
on a binomial tree.
As we solve for stock options, it's
convenient to use Monte Carlo for European-style options
where there's no choice about whether
or not to early exercise the option.
Implementing these models using Monte Carlo
involves three steps.
The first is to discretize a risk-neutral version
of the model.
That allows you to then generate short-term paths of interest
rates using a random number generator to get draws
from a standard normal density function.
Remember that we discussed how to do that in Excel last week.
The discretized version of the general one-factor model
can be written like this.

It says that the short-term rate at the next time step,
time t plus delta t, is the rate at time t
plus the drift function times the size of the time
step, delta t, plus a volatility term based on the function
sigma of r and t, the draw from the standard normal density,
epsilon of t, and the square root of the time
increment, root delta t.
The term, epsilon t, times the square root of delta t
is the discrete representation of the dz
in the original equation.

The second step is to calculate the implied term structure
of interest rates as of time 0.
If you have a closed form solution for the yield curve,
as in the case of the CIR model, you can use that.
It's more likely though that you'll
have to infer the term structure from pricing zero-coupon bonds
of various maturities.
To price a cheap period zero-coupon bonds using Monte
Carlo, you discount the payoff on the bond
at time cap t, its maturity, back to time 0
by compounding the short-term rates along each Monte Carlo
path.
Averaging the implied prices across a large number
of Monte Carlo paths gives the price
estimate for the bond at time 0.
Then the yield implied by the average price
is the t period yield and the yield curve.
Depending on what you're trying to do,
you may also need to calculate the term structure
on future dates, such as on the expiration
date of an option you're pricing along each path at that date.
You would need to do that, for example, to figure out
the distribution of a bond's price
on that future date as an input into calculating the payoff
on a put or call option on that bond.
You can follow the same procedure
I just described starting with the rate on each path
at the expiration date and solving for the term structure
starting at that point, based on another large number
of additional Monte Carlo simulations.
As you can see, this can all require a very large number
of computations, but it's made feasible
by the availability of high-speed computing.

The third and final step is to find the payoff
on the option you're trying to price
on each path on the expiration date.
The option payoff on each path is discounted back to time 0,
again, using the product of successive rates
along the path for discounting.
The average of those time 0 present values
across simulated paths is your estimate of the option value.
This is also a good time to say a word
about calibrating these models.
In these models, the drift function and the volatility
function are where you have free variables available to tune
the model to match current bond price data and current option
price data.
The process for doing that generally
involves a nonlinear fitting optimization program.

Continuous time models can also be discretized
in a way that's consistent with representing them
on a binomial tree.
As I've emphasized, that can be necessary
when the optimal exercise policy needs
to be determined at the same time
as option value is being calculated.
Again, starting with the general equation for one-factor models
of the instantaneous interest rates,
a binomial tree can be calibrated
using these equations for the up or down node where r is
the value on the previous node.

Because these models represent very short-term rates,
it takes a very large number of steps
to approximate the original continuous time
model with any accuracy.
Once again, we've covered a lot of ground this week.
The theme has been on pricing options
on fixed income securities and directly on interest rates.
We saw that because the statistical properties of bonds
are often not well behaved, it's typical to start
with a model of the statistical process for interest rates.
Nevertheless, the options prices that come out of these modeling
approaches rest on no arbitrage logic and the fact
that option payoffs can be replicated by a dynamic trading
strategy in the underlying fixed-income securities
and a risk free bond.
You'll get some further practice with pricing
using binomial trees and interest
rates in the recitation and in the homework problems.