
PROFESSOR: We'll now turn to options pricing models that
rest on assumptions about the underlying
distribution of interest rates rather than of bond prices.
To price options on fixed income securities,
it's important to recognize that this often requires not just
modeling the distribution of a particular future rate,
but rather a model of the stochastic evolution
of the entire term structure of interest rates or the yield
curve.
You need to be able to answer the question,
how are spot and forward rates expected to move over time
and what's the volatility of those movements?
We'll start by building answers to those questions,
starting with binomial models of short term interest rates
and how to calibrate them to market data
and then use them to price interest rate derivatives.
Then we'll look at some continuous time
models of stochastic yield curves
and how they can be used for pricing by Monte
Carlo or binomial methods.
This figure shows a binomial tree
that represents the time evolution of the short term
risk free interest rate.

As with any binomial model, choices
have to be made about what determines
the value of the underlying variable at each node, which
in this case is a short term interest rate and about
the probabilities of an up and a down move at each node.
For tractability and to avoid overfitting,
the evolution of interest rates and the associated
probabilities are restricted by a set of rules.
Different models are distinguished by how
those rules are set.
As in the earlier binomial models we've worked with,
the model can be either physical or risk neutral.
For pricing purposes, the risk neutral version of the models
is typically used.
For other applications, like understanding
the physical distribution of outcomes,
for instance to calculate the value of risk for a portfolio,
physical probabilities are used instead.
In all cases we want to use a model that
produces realistic predictions about the prices
of the fixed income securities and options
that we want to use the model for.

Volatility is a key input for all stochastic interest rate
models and options pricing models.
As before, the vertical distance between nodes
on a tree at a point in time is how volatility is incorporated
into a binomial model.
Rate volatility can be estimated from historical data
or it can be inferred using implied volatilities
from option prices.
The formulas here are a reminder of how
to estimate interest rate volatility using
historical data.
As usual, the first step is to choose
the relevant historical period and collect data.

A natural question is, how long to look back historically.
Unfortunately, there's no general answer
to that question because there's always a trade off
between having enough data to come up
with a reliable estimate and avoiding using data that's
too old and that may be no longer
relevant to the current environment.
Judgment must always be exercised.
The second step is to calculate the standard deviation
of yields.
Note here that standard deviations
are calculated in terms of proportional interest rate
changes, not level changes.
But either approach can be used.
And how the information is incorporated into a tree
will be different with a multiplicative factor
in the case of proportional changes
and with an additive one with level changes.
Volatility of course, is based on the standard deviation,
here using daily data annualized by multiplying
by a factor of either the square root of 365
or the square root of 250.
The former reflects the idea that volatility
on trading days and online trading days
is similar, even if you can't see it on the nontrading days.
The latter reflects the idea that volatility only
occurs on trading days.
The truth probably lies somewhere in between.
As with other variables used in calibrations
the choice of volatility can be fine tuned
to produce a model that most accurately reproduces observed
security and options prices.
In either case, scaling by a square root factor
based on a number of days reflects the assumption
that rate changes are independent over time.
Here's an example of using this procedure
to estimate proportional interest rate
changes based on daily data on one year rates.
The first percentage change here is
based on the difference between the first two
daily observations.

The standard deviation of daily changes,
found here to be 0.00857, in this particular example
was annualized by multiplying by the square root of 365
to give an annualized volatility of 0.1638 or 16.38%.
A very simple model of the evolution of short term rates
assumes that the rate on the up node
is the rate on the previous time step multiplied by 1 plus D,
where D is a fixed constant.
The rate on the down node is the rate
of the previous time step divided
by 1 plus D. This creates a recombining tree
Let's assume that the initial rate is 4%
and that the risk neutral probability of an up move
is 0.5.
If we equate the D parameter to our estimate
of an annualized proportional standard deviation.
And if each step on the tree represents one year,
we can get a 2-step tree calibrated to the volatility
estimate we just calculated.
And that's shown here.
For shorter time steps, we use the annualized estimate
multiplied by the square root of the time interval,
for instance multiplying by the square root of 0.5
for a period of six months.
The algebra here in the blue box establishes
that equating D to the volatility, in this case,
produces a standard deviation of rate changes in the tree that's
consistent with the estimated volatility.

So far we've seen an example of how the evolution of short term
rates can be represented on a binomial tree
and how rate volatility can be incorporated into the model.
But what we need to price bond options
is not just a model of the evolution of short term rates
but of the entire yield curve.
An extremely important observation
that you should definitely spend some time to really understand
is this.
Implicit in any bond pricing model
based on the evolution of short term rates
is also a model of the evolution of the entire yield curve.
To see why that's true, let's look at a very simple example
based on the first step of the risk neutral binomial tree
we just constructed.
The key will be to recall that the yield curve can
be derived from bond prices.
So if a tree can be used to price bonds
of different maturities, it can also
be used to find the implied yield curve.
This is most straightforward to do by using the implied
prices of zero coupon bonds.

The one year spot rate here is 4%.
And it goes up to 4.66 in one year or down to 3.44.
To find a two year spot yield, we
use this tree to find the time zero price of a two year
zero coupon bond with a face value of 100.
We're going to do this working backward through the tree.
But the difference from what we did earlier
is that instead of using a constant value for the risk
free rate we'll be discounting using
the rates at the different points on the tree.
For example, the price of the bond
at time one, when the bond has one year left
to maturity and on the up node where the rate is 4.66%
is 100 divided by 1.0466 which gives us
a price on that node of 95.547.
On the down node, the bond is worth 96.674,
found by discounting at the 3.44% rate on that node.
Using the risk neutral probability of 0.5,
the expected value of the bond at time one
is the numerator in this equation.

The value that is discounted back to time
zero using the one year rate of 4%
to give a time 0 price of 92.414.
The two year yield implicit in the zero coupon bond price
is found then in the usual way by asking what yield equates
the bond price with the discounted
value of its promised payoff of 102 years.

Solving for y2 gives a two year spot yield
of 4.02% stated as a simple annual percentage rate.

To generalize, what this example establishes
is that starting from any node on a binomial tree
you can use the model of short rates
and risk neutral probabilities to infer the prices of zero
coupon bonds of any maturity.
Thus embedded in a binomial model of short rates
is also a model of the entire future yield
curve from the perspective of any node on the tree.
