
INSTRUCTOR: Options on floating rate securities
include caps, collars, and floors.
floating rate securities expose borrowers and lenders
to uncertainty about the interest rate payments
they'll have to make in the future
or that they will receive.
An interest rate cap limits the maximum rate that will be paid.
An interest rate floor limits the minimum rate
that will be paid.
And an interest rate collar puts both an upper and lower bound
on the rate that will be paid.
That makes a collar a portfolio that
contains a long cap and a short floor
from the perspective of a borrower.
These sorts of provisions are often
embedded in loan contracts.
For example, variable rate mortgages
often have a yearly and lifetime cap
on the amount by which the rate paid can increase.
In such cases, the interest rate set in the loan contract
reflects the value of the various provisions.
Caps and floors can also be purchased
in the over-the-counter market for an upfront fee
based on some amount of notional principal
but independent of any particular loan.
Because the methods used to value caps and floors
are similar, we'll just focus on caps.
Typically, a floating rate security
is tied to a common reference rate,
like LIBOR or a short-term Treasury rate, or SOFR.
There is also often a fixed spread
that's paid on top of the floating rate.

An interest rate cap is often described
as a strip of call options on a variable interest rate.
The separate elements of the cap,
one for each interval between interest rate resets,
are called caplets.
The payoff on a cap depends on the underlying principal,
the period length, and the difference between the floating
rate at time t, called R sub t, which
is based on the index plus any spread,
and the cap rate, R sub x.
As written here, the rates are given as annual percentage
rates.
For example, say you take out a 3-year floating rate
loan with a principal of $100,000 and an interest rate
that's paid semiannually and linked to six-month LIBOR plus
50 basis points.
The rate resets every six months, and it's capped at 7%.

To explain the timing convention,
the interest payment at the end of the first six months
is based on the six-month LIBOR rate observed in the market
on the loan origination date.
And then the rate paid at the end of the first year
is based on the six-month LIBOR rate in the market six months
after you took out the loan, and so forth.
For the cap, then, its payout at the end
of each six-month period is the $100,000
of principal times the time between resets
of half a year times the maximum of the savings
from the cap based on how much the interest
rate is above the 7% cap and 0.
You can see from this diagram why
the payoff looks like a call option on the variable interest
rate.
You can also think of the payoff in opportunity cost terms
as the amount of interest that you avoid
paying because of the cap.
A cap can be priced on a binomial tree, where the step
length corresponds to the time period between interest rate
resets.
Let's look at an example that uses the same one-year interest
rate tree and risk-neutral probabilities
that we've been working with.
Consider a three-year loan with principal value $100,000
that's indexed to the one-year rates represented in this tree.
We want to know what's the value of a 4.75% rate cap.
The nodes here that are circled are
those at which cap will be in the money
because the rate exceeds the cap rate of 4.75%.
So at time 1, the cap is effective on the up node
and at time 2, it's operative at the up-up and at the up-down.

Therefore, there are two caplets with positive values.
It's important to be careful about the timing here.
The interest rate is always paid one year after the rate is set,
so the benefit is discounted back an additional year.
For example, the cap set at time 1
affects the interest payment made at time 2.
The calculations shown here are equivalent to working backwards
on the tree in the usual way, discounting the two
possible outcomes of the next period
by the current one-period rate.
Here, though, all that discounting
is collapsed into a single equation.
You can verify that the answer is
the same as with the longer-form calculations.
Well, similarly, the value of the second caplet,
which has a positive payoff on the top and middle nodes
at time 2, is found to be $775.
Notice that although the tree is recombining and interest rates,
the present value of the protection
on the up-down and down-up node is different
because you're using different interest rates for discounting.
The bottom line is that the value of the cap
is the sum of the value of the two caplets, which totals $879.
