
PROFESSOR: Up to this point, we've
taken the interest rate tree used to price the callable
bond as given.
Of course, in practice, analysts have to calibrate and test
their models against actual price data
to have enough confidence in the models
to use them to price derivative products sold to customers
or depend on the models in designing and executing
trading strategies.
The procedure for calibrating tree models
is typically iterative.
The first step is to fix some parameters at observed values
or assume values and then to guess
the value of other parameters that
are free variables in the calibration.

Under those assumptions, the second step
is to calculate the value of a set of bonds and options
where market prices can be reliably observed.

The third step is to compare the estimated prices
with the observed prices.
If the two sets of values differ,
then the free parameters need to be
modified in a direction that's expected
to reduce the divergence.
Those steps are repeated until the gap between the model
prediction and observed prices is judged
to be sufficiently small.
It will usually be impossible to bring the gap to 0,
because a simplified model can't capture all of the factors that
affect market values.
In that case, it makes sense to put more weight
on matching prices of securities or derivatives
that are most similar to the ones
that the model will be used to price.

Let's go through an illustration of this sort of calibration
exercise.
It's based on a simple modeling approach that
was suggested by Frank Fabozzi.
Imagine that the current term structure
of interest rates or the yield curve
is given by the rates shown here.
The table also shows the implied one-year forward rates.
You should verify that the implied forward rates are
consistent with the spot rates.
For example, 1.035 compounded with 1.04523
is the same as 1.0401 squared.
All of these rates are simple annual percentage rates
like the ones we've been using.
With this term structure, a two-year 4% coupon bond prices
at par, as does a three-year 4.5% coupon bond.

Our goal now is to construct a three-year interest rate
tree that produces bond prices that
are consistent with the yield data we just looked
at and also with an estimate of the percentage
volatility of the one-year rate.
Because we have more free variables
and we'll need to match the reference data that we're
using in this example, for convenience,
we'll fix the risk neutral probability
of an up move at 0.5.
Note that other models would assign
the risk neutral probabilities and the values
that each node differently.
What we're looking at is just one possibility.
Assume that recent historical data
implies a volatility of 0.1 estimated
on a continuous annual basis.
A standard way to implement that volatility
is to assume a two-standard-deviation vertical
distance between nodes at a point in time.
Then starting at RL on the tree that's pictured here,
RH is found by multiplying RL times e
to the 2 times the standard deviation, sigma.
To put numbers on it, if RL is 4.074,
then our H is 4.074 times e to the 2 times 0.1, or 4.976.
Given all of these assumptions, we're
left with the binomial tree in one-year rates
with only one free variable at each time step.

That free variable is the lowest node at each year.
The nodes above it are determined
by the two standard deviations spacing that we've assumed.

We also know R0 from the current one year rate.
We'll find the remaining values of the free rates R1 and R2
by iterating until this model prices bonds correctly.
Starting with a two-period case, we
take R0 equals 3.5%, reading it off
of the current term structure.
Let's guess that RL is 4.5%.
Then given our assumption of sigma equal to 0.1,
RH is 4.5 times e to the 2 times 0.1, or 5.496.
You may wonder why I chose in RL that's greater
than R0, the lower node.
The reason is that in the reference rates
we're trying to match the yield curve is upward sloping.
That initial guess of 4.5% is actually
less than the implied forward rate for that same time period,
which was calculated at 4.523%.
We can now use the first two periods of our guess
for the tree to price a two-year of 4% coupon bond.
So our tree was 3.5% going to 4.5%, or 5.496.
That procedure for pricing that two-year bond is shown here.
And it implies a price for the bond of 99.567.
Clearly, there's something wrong with the assumptions
I've made here.
To be consistent with the yield curve,
the bond must price at 100 its par value.
But the model suggests its price is 99.567.
Using the degree of freedom that we've
allowed ourselves, which is to vary R1, the interest
rate at the bottom node, we can look
for a value that generates the correct price for the bond.
For the implied bond price to be higher, clearly,
R1 needs to be lower.
Iterating on the choice of R1, you
can verify that setting it to 4.074
causes the tree to correctly price the two-year 4% coupon
bond.

To extend the tree out another year,
we want to choose the lowest node on the tree, R2,
to match the known price of a three-year bond.
We do this holding R0 and R1 fixed
so that the model will continue to correctly price
one and two-year bonds.
This process is automated in an Excel spreadsheet
that you can download from the class materials
page called TreeFitterMM.xls.

It's programmed in Visual Basic to create a binomial tree
that's consistent with the set of input prices for zero coupon
bonds, which represents the yield curve.
It can create a tree that's actually
more general than the one we've been looking at,
because it accommodates different volatility
assumption for each time step.
That allows you to incorporating time varying volatility
into the model, which is also referred to as the term
structure of volatility.
For instance, if volatility is temporarily elevated,
but expected to return to normal levels at a future time,
that can be reflected in the volatility structure
that you input.
The spreadsheet also allows for the tree
to be calibrated from the implied
volatilities from inputting options price data.
In that mode, which you won't be asked to use
but that you may be curious about,
the implied volatilities replace the assumed volatilities.
Speaking of implied volatilities,
this slide is a reminder that it's always
possible to convert an options pricing
model into a model that's used to estimate implied
volatilities.
That's true of binomial tree models
as well as for analytical models such as Black's model.
A typical options pricing model, whatever the underlying asset
that the option is written on, includes an assumption
about the volatility of that underlying variable.
In the case of models based on interest rates,
it's the volatility of those rates.
The assumption about volatility combined with the other inputs
and entered into a pricing model generates a theoretical options
price as an output.
By taking the same model, but inputting observed options
prices instead of volatilities, the output
will give you an implied volatility.
