PROFESSOR: Many fixed income securities
have options that are embedded into their contractual terms.
Those include corporate and government bonds
that contain a call or put provision.
It also includes prepayable mortgages that
give borrowers a call option.
Other options in the fixed income marketplace
are standalone contracts that are
traded on exchanges or in the over-the-counter market.
Those include options on futures contracts for Treasury notes
and bonds and on short-term rates,
the trade on exchanges, and options on interest rates,
such as caps, floors, and collars,
and swaptions that often trade in the over-the-counter market,
although they're sometimes also embedded in other contracts.
You might think that bond options could be priced just
like stock options, substituting bond
prices in the place of stock prices
and using the same formulas and procedures as before.
While that idea is broadly correct,
the models we've studied often do a very poor job
of pricing options in the fixed income world
because of the major differences in the statistical behavior
of bond prices and of stock prices.
Specifically, the critical assumptions
underlying the traditional Black-Scholes-Merton options
pricing model are often seriously
violating for bond prices.
The problematic assumptions include,
first, a constant volatility parameter.
Second, that prices are lognormally
distributed and unbounded.
And, third, that the risk free rate is constant.
Furthermore, many bond options are
American style and early exercises frequently optimal.
Similar statistical problems arise using binomial models
in bond prices.

We'll see shortly that the way to address these issues
is to drive the price of the options
on fixed income securities using stochastic models of interest
rates not bond prices.

This example provides a very dramatic demonstration
of how directly applying the Black-Scholes-Merton model
to price bond options can fail.
Consider a three-year European call option
with a strike price of $110 written
on a three-year zero coupon bond with a face value of $100.
Clearly the option is worthless because the bond will pay off
$100 with certainty at the end of the three years
and the option will always expire out of the money.
But if someone hadn't thought about this
and instead tried to use the Black-Scholes-Merton model
with standard assumptions reflecting current interest
rates and observed bond price volatilities, say, they
saw an interest rate of 10% and estimated a 4% annual bond
price volatility, they would then
conclude that the option was worth 7.78 not 0.
One of the most important reasons
that models for stock options fail when directly applied
to bond options is the constant volatility parameter
assumption.
The graph here illustrates the critical difference
for stocks and for bonds.
On this figure the x-axis represents
the horizon one is looking forward
to from the perspective of time 0
and the y-axis is the volatility of the underlying asset price.
For assets like stocks whose prices can be reasonably
approximated by a lognormal distribution,
the volatility, as a function of horizon,
is given by the volatility parameter
sigma multiplied by the square root of the time horizon.
Thus, the volatility can be represented
by a fixed parameter sigma.
And the pattern looks like this with volatility
as a function of horizon.
The price volatility of bonds is primarily
driven by changes in interest rates.
Initially, volatility of bond prices
also increases with horizon because interest rates
become more uncertain looking forward
over a longer time period.

However, there's a second offsetting effect that
isn't present for stocks, that's--
that the remaining duration of the bond
becomes shorter as time passes.
We know that the price sensitivity to interest rate
changes is proportional to duration.
So as duration shrinks, so does the volatility
of the bond price.
That's what's called a pull-to-par, where
at the bond's maturity date there's
no uncertainty about its value, which
will be equal to its par value.
Despite the problems that we saw arise
applying the Black-Scholes-Merton model
to bond options, a variant of it, Black's model,
is often used for short dated options on longer term bonds.
Recall the Black's model is popular for pricing commodities
and futures options.
In general, it's applicable when two conditions hold.
First, the option payoff depends only
on the value of a variable at a particular point in time
but not on the path it took to get there.
And, second, that it's reasonable to assume
that the distribution of the variable at that point in time
is normally or lognormally distributed.
The formula is shown here is for a lognormal distribution.
Those assumptions are often realistic for bond options
when the life of the option is much shorter than the maturity
of the underlying bond.
Looking back at the graph we just talked about,
you can see that early in the life
of the bond, the pattern of volatility is much the same
as it is for a stock.
Therefore, it's reasonable to treat the distribution
of the future price at short horizons
as being lognormally distributed.
Black's model is versatile and it's
used for a variety of applications.
Along with commodities and futures options,
it's also frequently used to price and quote
interest rate caps, and floors, and swaptions.

As a reminder, this slide shows the Black's model formulas,
which we also looked at a few weeks ago.
You can find it programmed into the Excel spreadsheet
available on the course materials page called
BSMandBlacksmodel.xls.
In the recitation, you'll see a numerical example
of how it can be used to price short dated options on longer
maturity bonds.
