
PROFESSOR: We're about to embark on an extended example of how
to value risk-free bonds with embedded options using
binomial trees.
Our preliminary observation is that bonds
with embedded options can be decomposed into their component
parts.
By no arbitrage, the value of a callable bond
must be equal to the value of the underlying
non-callable bond, which is also called a straight bond,
less the value of the call option.
The call option reduces the bond's value
because it's to the advantage of the bond issuer,
causing bond buyers to pay less for the bond.
Similarly, the value of a puttable bond
is the value of the underlying straight bond plus the value
of the put option.
In that case, the bond is worth more,
because the put is a benefit to the bond buyer.
In general, we'd like our model of interest rates
to accurately price both the option-free bond
and the embedded options attached to it.
In this example we'll be looking at,
we'll use a binomial model to first price the bond
and the call option separately, and then
infer the value of the callable bond from the two pieces.
The two-step binomial tree shown here in one-year rates
with a risk-neutral probability of an up move of 0.5
will be the basis for pricing bonds and options
in the examples we'll look at.
Notice that at a time t node, the rates in the tree
are always used to discount cash flows arriving at time t + 1
back to time t.
Thus, this tree will be used to price bonds
with maturities of one, two, and three years.
We'll first focus on how to value bonds and options taking
the tree as given.
After that, we'll turn to how it was
calibrated using market data.

We'll begin by using the tree to estimate the value of a 5.25%
coupon bond, making annual coupon payments
with no embedded options.
Starting at time t, the bond will always
pay off its principal value of 100
plus the final coupon of 5.25.
The value, V, then at each time two node
is found by discounting the expected value of 105.25
backed by the one-year interest rate at that node.
The value of 95.58 at the time two up-up node, for instance,
is discounting that payment of 105.25
back at the rate of 6.757.
Note that the values on the year 2 nodes
represent the remaining value after the year two
coupon has already been paid.
Now, to find the value at each time one node,
the risk-neutral expectation of the time two value
plus the time two coupon is discounted back to time one
at the time one interest rate.
The value on the time one down node, for instance,
is based on the expected value plus a coupon payment at time
two on the down-up node and on the down-down node discounted
at the time one interest rate of 4.074.
Continuing in this way all the way back to time zero
gives a value for the bond of 102.075.
A few observations here.
It's clear we didn't need a binomial model to estimate
the value of a risk-free bond with no embedded options --
we could have estimated its value directly
from the yield curve or equivalently from the prices
of comparable bonds.
However, we will need the tree to value bonds
with embedded options and, if we want
to have confidence in our tree as a pricing tool,
we want to be able to demonstrate
that the bond prices that it generates
are consistent with the yield curve.
We'll come back to this later, when
we discuss how to calibrate the tree in the first place.
Now, imagine the same bond is callable by the issuer
at the end of the second year, after the year two coupon has
been paid at a strike price of 99.50.
We can use the tree to value that call option,
again working backwards.
Comparing the 99.50 strike price with the values we found a time
two on each node, the call is out of the money on the up-up
node.
It's in the money by 0.232 on the up-down or down-up node,
and in the money by 1.19 on the down-down node.

Notice that when using interest rate trees instead of price
trees, the calls have greater value on the lower branches,
because lower rates translate into higher bond values
and conversely for puts.
We can discount those payoffs working backwards on the tree
and at each node using the one-year rate on that node
for discounting.
For instance, at the time one up node, the value of the call
is 0.11 based on a probability of 0.5
that it will be worth 0.232 next period and a probability of 0.5
that it will be worth nothing and discounting that expected
value by 4.976%
Continuing again back to time zero,
we estimate that the value of the European call is 0.383.
Because the value of the call reduces
the value of the bond to the lender
by the value of the call option, we
estimate the value of the callable bond
as the value of the straight bond
minus the value of the call option which comes to 101.692.
The fact that embedded options affect bond prices
means they also affect yields.
Remember that the yield on a bond
is based on finding the single discount
rate that equates its price with its promised payments.
On the three-year 5.25% coupon bond with no embedded options,
our model implies that it would have a yield of 4.495
based on this equation here and solving for y.
When it's callable, because the price is lower,
the implied yield is higher at 4.633%.
This difference can loosely be described
as the issuer paying about 14 basis points for the call
option.
The final note here is that you may see the term
option-adjusted spread.
That describes an adjustment that's sometimes
made to yields that removes the effect of embedded put and call
options.
That sort of adjustment is used in creating indices
of bond yields, such as for corporate bonds
with triple B credit ratings.
