
PROFESSOR: Now, think about it.
Why do you think the investors or the stockholders
were concerned about this 25% earnings shortfall?
So one reason is that investors have
a mental model in which the stock
price is equal to expected discounted earnings.
So the earnings expectations feed into the stock price,
where my E of earnings there means discounted expected
future earnings.
Now, in your finance classes, you'll
learn that this is not exactly correct.
What the stock price is is the present value of discounted
expected cash flows, E of cash flows there.
Why does the accounting for the sales of Shrek 2 DVDs matter?
Well, for one thing, earnings help predict future cash flows.
And in fact, earnings are a better predictor
of future cash flows than our current cash flows.
So you can sort think of what happens
as earnings tell us something about future cash flows
and then future cash flows then tell us something
about the stock price.
And when earnings are lower, the stock price
is going to be lower because earnings are telling us
that future cash flows are going to be lower.
Now, what other or alternative approaches could
we use to account for the sale of a DVD?
Let's think of what's called the value chain.
With a DVD, we make the DVD.
That's the first stage in the value chain.
We ship it.
That's the second stage in the value chain.
And then we ship it to some retailers, say, like Walmart.
And if Walmart sells the DVD, he'll
send money to us at DreamWorks in, say, 60 to 90 days.
But if the retailer does not sell it,
the retailer has a right to return.
So the retailer's going to send the DVD back to DreamWorks.
So when you think about it, we could do our accounting
at any one of those three places in the value chain.
We could do it when we make it.
And some companies like Dell computer,
which have a really fast production process,
as soon as they finish building a computer,
they ship it to you, the consumer.
And so build-to-order companies actually do their accounting
as soon as they make it.
A second place so we could do it is when we ship it.
And then a final place we can do it
is we could wait for the retailer
to either send us our cash back or to return the DVD to us.
Now, where do you think that DreamWorks is actually
doing the accounting?
That's right, at shipping.
This is accrual accounting.
So at the time that DreamWorks ships the DVD,
they make an estimate on how many
DVDs are going to be returned.
And at that point, they do they're accounting
for the sale of the DVD.
Now, of course, they could wait until they get the cash,
and that would be called cash accounting.
We're going to focus on accrual accounting
in this class for reasons that will become clear
in just a minute.

So how do you then think that DreamWorks accounts for the DVD
sales and the sales returns?
Well, again, we're doing accrual accounting.
So at the time we ship the DVDs, we know we shipped 100 DVDs.
We're going to make an estimate that, say, we're
going to get 30 DVDs back.
That'll tell us how much sales we have.
It'll also tell us how much earnings we have.
And this is called more relevant accounting
so that we're able, by doing this,
to tell our investors what our performance is sooner.
If we waited until the retailer sent cash,
that would be cash accounting.
It would be more reliable, but we'd
have to wait till the future till the dealer either sold
a DVD or returned the DVD to us.
So there's a trade-off here between relevance
and reliability.
We want to get our stockholders' information faster.
That's more relevant.
But that's less reliable.
We're more likely to make mistakes.
So final question, what are we estimating
here and what factors affect the accuracy of those estimates?
Well, clearly, when you think about what we're estimating
is how many DVDs are going to be returned.
So any DVDs returned, we're not going to be able to sell them.
Once we have an estimate of how many DVDs are returned,
we can estimate how much sales we make.
Those are the ones that are not returned.
And then we can estimate how much earnings
we're going to make.
That will be sales minus any other expenses.

In terms of the accuracy of this estimate,
the estimate's going to be more accurate
when the market's more stable and when the company has
a longer history.
Now, from reading the case, you know that DreamWorks just came
public in the last year or so.
So DreamWorks doesn't have a long history.
And you also know that this market
has had a lot of big changes in it
in the last six months or a year or so.
So all those things cause us to make an inaccurate forecast.