
PROFESSOR: In terms of the consequences of our accounting
choices--
so we've made an inaccurate forecast.
That's going to affect our earnings performance.
That's going to affect our stock price.
That's going to affect our volume, which
means how much of our stock gets traded,
our liquidity, again, which has to do with how
much of the stock gets traded.

In the United States, if you make a mistake on your earnings
forecasts, you can be sued.
If you're a manager and you make a mistake on your earnings
forecasts and you get sued, that affects your reputation.
That may affect your compensation.
And then we know, in the United States,
that CEOs have a shelf life about five years.
So from the time you begin as a CEO
to the time you are retired or fired as the CEO
tends to be about five years.
And if you make a mistake like this,
that five years will be on the short side
rather than on the long side.

Now, let's look at the reaction of DreamWorks stock
to these lower than expected earnings.
Remember, we announced our earnings on May 10th.
The stock price fell about 14% that day.
There was a huge spike in volume that day.
And again, when the market learns of our earnings
shortfall--
minus 14% return.

Roughly 10% of our shares outstanding were traded.
That's five times the normal share volume.
And most uncomfortably, we lost $450 million
in market capitalization.
Market capitalization means, if you take the share price
and multiply it by shares outstanding,
that's also known as market value or market cap.
And then, finally, we got sued by six different shareholder
groups.
And getting sued is really bad if you're a chief executive,
because even if you're innocent, it
takes lots and lots of your time going to court,
being deposed, sort of sitting around.
And all that time when you're sort
of dealing with these lawsuits, it's
time that you're not running your business.

So in terms of the takeaways from this mini case, Shrek
2 for DreamWorks, we see the market considers earnings
information to be important.
We see this trade-off between relevance--
we want to get shareholders' information soon--
versus reliability.
If we wait longer, we can get them better information.
But it's not as soon.
We see there's two types of accounting--
cash flows, which is when the cash comes in--
that's reliable but not relevant.
Then there's earnings, which are a combination of cash flows
and accruals.
And accruals are estimates of future cash flows.
So earnings are relevant but less reliable.

So there are accounting rules and there's
accounting judgment.
The rules say that we can record revenue
when we ship these DVDs.
Judgment is what management uses to figure out
how many of these DVDS will be returned.
This rookie management team in this early-stage company
used bad judgment.
They made a mistake here, and they're paying for it
with stockholders' lawsuits.