
PROFESSOR: So here's our agenda for the remainder
of this class.
Main goal is to introduce to you the balance sheet equation
approach.
This is a way for us to analyze the effect of a transaction,
say, like estimating expected returns in Shrek 2,
how that transaction affects a firm's financial statements.
And throughout the course, we're going to use the balance sheet
equation as our main tool.
We're also going to define some key concepts
of financial accounting.
So I'll give you a couple of definitions.
And this is not a big deal.
You'll be able, on a test or something,
to have access to these definitions.
And then we're going to practice how
to record some transactions, and we're
going to prepare some financial statements.
And all along, what we're doing is
introducing the mechanics of what
we call accrual accounting.

So as an introduction, accounting
is the process of conveying information
to the firm's stakeholders.
So who are our stakeholders?
So you probably think of stockholders, debt holders,
creditors or people that own your debt, suppliers,
people that give you goods in exchange for credit,
employees-- why do employees care about your accounting?
Because employees have-- they want
to be paid by you over a long period of time,
and they want to make sure that your company is financially
healthy.
Customers for the same reason--
if you buy a Tesla from Elon Musk,
you want you want to know that Tesla
is going to be around for the next 5 to 10 years
to service your car.
And we can certainly think of other people, as well.
In terms of the types of information
that stakeholders want, this is just some terminology.
What does the company own?
So we're going to call those assets.
What does the company owe?
Well, what the company owes we're
going to call liabilities.
And then what do shareholders own?
We're going to call that shareholders' equity.
How did the company perform?
Well, we've seen one measure of this
already as net income or earnings.
Cash flow is another measure of performance
that we'll talk about later.