
PROFESSOR: Now, for the balance sheet equation,
I'm going to use the acronym for this,
BSE, balance sheet equation.
So we got assets, what we own.
We got liabilities, what we owe.
And then we got shareholders' equity,
which is what the owners own.
And there's a lot of synonyms here.
Shareholders' equity is sometimes
called book value, sometimes called net worth,
sometimes called residual claim, and we'll make
that clear in a second why.
So what this says is that assets equals liabilities
plus shareholders' equity.
A equals L plus SE.
Now, a good way to think about this,
especially when you're starting off, is think about yourself.
What kind of assets do you own?
Well, maybe you own a car.
And maybe, when you bought that car,
you took out a loan on that car.
And so your shareholders' equity on that car
is going to be the difference between the loan value--
I mean, the car value and the loan balance.
And that'll be your net worth.
So that's the sense that stockholders' equity
or shareholders' equity is net worth.
Some more formal definitions here
of assets and liabilities--
assets-- there's three tests for an asset.
You have a right to ownership.
So you own your car.
Your car is associated with future benefits.
So it's not just a complete junker,
but you can drive that car around.
And the value of that car is measured
with reasonable accuracy.
So that's an asset.
Cases where assets are not thought
to be measurable with reasonable accuracy
is when you make investments in research and development.
Clearly, those investments have benefits,
but the accounting system doesn't think of those benefits
as being measurable with reasonable accuracy.
So we don't put-- in the US in particular,
we don't put any assets on our balance sheet
having to do with R&D investments.
So play with those definitions when you have a chance.
Liabilities-- also three tests.
It's a past transaction so that I've done something
to incur the liability.
So I borrowed money from you.
And it involves a future obligation.
In the future, I have to pay you money back or maybe I'll
deliver you a good or maybe I'll deliver you a service.
So those are two tests.
And then, again, notice here, there's
a measurable with reasonable accuracy test.
So most liabilities will be on the balance sheet.
The one liability that we've kind of
seen earlier today that won't be on the balance sheet
is if you're sued.
So if you're sued, there's a past transaction.
There's a future obligation.
You're going to probably have to pay out some kind of cash
or settle it otherwise.
But the accounting system says, that lawsuit is not
measurable with reasonable accuracy.
So that's not going to be a liability.
It'll be something called a contingent liability, which
will show up in the footnotes to our financial statements.

And then we want a definition of shareholders' equity.
So remember, shareholders' equity,
which I'm going to use the acronym SE,
is equal to the difference between assets and liabilities
just by the balance sheet equation,
which says assets equals liabilities
plus stockholders' equity.
So we can rearrange that to be stockholders' equity
equals assets minus liabilities.
And it says here that shareholders
are the residual claimant to the firm's assets.
And what that means is, if the firm liquidates or goes
into bankruptcy, we'll sell off all the assets
and we'll get some cash with the proceeds
of the sales of those assets.
And then we'll pay off all the liabilities.
And to the extent that there's anything left over
after we sell off all the assets and pay off
all the liabilities, we, the stockholders,
are the residual claimants of that.
We get what's left over.
And then just for accounting purposes,
we're going to divide shareholders' equity
into something called contributed capital--
that's what happens when you issue stock--
and something called retained earnings,
which is what happens when you keep
your earnings within the firm.
So contributed capital, again, comes
from the issuance of stock.
Retained earnings are profits that we
haven't given back to our shareholders as dividends.
So that's a definition of assets, definition a liability,
definition of stockholders' equity.