
PROFESSOR: Now let's think about the income statement
equation, which says that net income equals
revenues minus expenses plus gains minus losses.
We've already seen some revenues.
So revenues are cash.
So we sell these DVDS to Walmart.
Walmart gives us our cash, so we got some cash revenues.
Or they're claims to cash.
So before Walmart gives us the cash, they've given us
and accounts receivable, which is telling us
that they owe us the money.
Revenues come from selling of goods or services.
Expenses are outflows of cash or outflows
of claims of cash that are incurred to generate revenues.
So when we send those DVDS to Walmart, each of those DVD
costs us some money at some point.
And so that cash that we put into building those DVDS
is the expense associated with selling those DVDs.

And then, this is a little bit ahead of ourselves,
but gains are inflows of assets that
are not generated through the ordinary course of business.
So an example of this would be if we sell a building
and make a gain on it, our ordinary course of business
is not selling buildings.
But if we have a one-time sale of a building for a gain,
that's a gain.
Similarly, if we have a one-time sale of a building for a loss,
then that's a loss.
Right now, we're just going to simplify the income statement,
we're going to ignore the gains, we're
going to ignore the losses, and we're
going to focus on revenues and expenses.

Now, we're going to link the income statement
and the balance sheet statement and the balance sheet
through shareholders' equity.
So as we just said, shareholders' equity
reflects contributed capital and retained earnings, and retained
earnings change as follows.
You've got some beginning retained earnings.
You add some net income.
You subtract a dividend.
That gives you your ending retained earnings.
So notice in that, net income is the difference
between revenues and expenses.
Revenues are going to increase retained earnings.
Expenses are going to decrease retained earnings.
So the retained earnings equation
links the balance sheet and the income statement together.

And then, having observed this, we can expand our balance sheet
equation, which is, again, Assets, A,
equals liabilities, L, plus Shareholders' Equity, SE.
Let's think of some examples of assets.
Well, there's cash, A/R, Accounts Receivable, INV,
Inventory.
So cash, accounts receivable, and inventory are all assets.
Liabilities are things like A/P, Accounts Payable, and bonds.
And then, we've already seeing that stockholders' equity
is contributed capital and retained earnings.
And as we just saw a minute ago, revenues
are going to increase retained earnings.
Expenses are going to decrease retained earnings.

So with accrual accounting, we're
trying to measure firm performance
in a particular period.
So for firms, this will be a year or a quarter.
So we're going to measure firm performance
in a particular year, regardless of when we get cash from it.
And we'll have an example of this in just a second.
And intuition for revenue recognition
is have we done the work?
Have we earned the revenue?
Is our earnings process substantially complete?
So with Shrek 2, once we send that DVD
and once we know it's not going to be sent back to us,
the earnings process is substantially complete.
Second test of revenue recognition--
is cash collection reasonably assured?
So when we send the DVD to Walmart,
clearly, Walmart's going to pay us.
Walmart's a good credit.
But if we send the DVD to John's Discount Shop, maybe John's
Discount Shop, the cash collection is not assured.
And we'll see how we can modify the accounting
system to reflect these two differences
in the next class or two.
And then, expenses are easy.
So we have a matching principle for expenses.
So when we recognize revenue, we're
going to recognize expenses in the same period
as the associated revenue.
So that's accrual accounting.
We got a revenue recognition rule.
Is the earnings process complete?
Is cash collection assured?
And if so, we're going to match any expenses in the same period
as the associated revenue.
So an accrual is where we recognize revenue and expenses,
regardless of whether we've gotten cash for that or not.