
PROFESSOR: A brief exercise--
this is a pretend company called the Peters Company.
Now, at the top of the slide there is an important fact.
So this company was only in business for two years.
And during those two years, it entered into the following
transactions.
So this is a startup.
It's going to start up.
It's going to operate for two years.
And then, as we'll see next class,
it's going to shut down and distribute
all its cash to its owners.
So we're going to focus on year one in this class.
So there are seven transactions in year one.
First transaction, the owners contributed $24,000 in cash.
And as you listen to these transactions,
try to think about how you would account for them using
the balance sheet equation, which is what we're
going to do in just a second.
Second transaction, at the beginning of the year,
we rented a warehouse for two years
and we prepaid that warehouse with a rent payment of $12,000.
So this is very much like when you rent an apartment
and you have to give a security deposit.
That security deposit functions as prepaid rent.
Third transaction, we purchased $10,000 of inventory
on account.
And what on account means here is
we're not giving our supplier $10,000 of cash when
we buy the inventory.
We're giving our supplier an account payable,
which is a promise that someday we'll pay the supplier $10,000.
Then we actually engage in a revenue transaction.
We sell half the inventory for $24,000.
We get $20,000 in cash for that.
And then, instead of giving us cash,
our customer gives us an accounts receivable of $4,000.
So here the customer is saying, someday
we're going to pay you $4,000.
Fifth transaction, we paid wages of $6,000 and we
accrued wages payable of $4,000.
So that means that we owe our employees $10,000.
We directly pay them in cash $6,000, and we owe them $4,000.
And if you think in your own experience,
if you ever worked for a company that pays you every two
weeks, halfway in that two weeks,
that company owes you money.
So they've got an accrued wages payable to you.
And they'll pay that money to you
at the end of the two weeks, a week from now.
Sixth transaction, we entered into a contract
with Julies Company to sell the remaining
inventory in year two.
And as part of that contract, we got a $6,000
cash advance from Julies Company.
And then the final transaction that we're
going to look at in this class is that we
paid a dividend of $1,000.
So what we're going to do now--

here's a pretend Excel spreadsheet.
Obviously, we're doing this on PowerPoint.
But we've got some assets.
We've got cash, accounts receivable, prepaid rent,
and inventory.
We got some liabilities.
We got A/P, which is accounts payable.
We've got DefRev, which is deferred revenue.
We got WPay, which is wages payable.
And then we've got our two stockholders' equity
components, which are contributed capital
and retained earnings.
So now what we're going to do--
for these seven transactions, we're
going to work through and go through these.
Now, we're doing this for year one.
But, at least theoretically, notice that Peters Company has
a balance sheet at year zero.