
PROFESSOR: How many assets does Peter's company have
at year zero?
It's got zero.
It's got zero liabilities.
It's got zero stockholders' equity.
So this is a start-up.
And then, conceptually, its initial balance sheet
has no assets, no liabilities, and no stockholders' equity.
Our first transaction as a new company
is we're going to raise some cash from our contributing
stockholders.
So cash is going to go up by $24,000.
So when you're doing these things,
always keep track of cash first.
So it's always easy to see what happened to cash.
Now we got to do something to balance the balance sheet
equation.
What would that something be?
Well, we sold some stock.
So then we know that that stock sale is going
to go into contributed capital.
And to make the balance sheet equation balance,
we're going to put 24,000 into contributed capital.
Notice, for convenience here, I'm just dropping the zeros.
Now, our second transaction is we rented this warehouse
and we prepaid rent of $12,000.
So first of all, let's keep track of cash.
What happened when we prepaid this rent?
Our cash went down by $12,000.
Now, what do we want to do to balance the balance sheet
equation?
Prepaid rent, which is an asset, increased by $12,000.
Now, notice, there on the spreadsheet,
I've got a line item called 2A there,
which is something that happens during the year.
Now, if you prepay rent for a full year and the year goes by,
what happens to your prepaid rent?
It gets used up.
You no longer have an asset there.
So we prepaid two years of prepaid rent.
How much prepaid rent did we use up in the first year?
It'll be 6.
So our prepaid rent goes down by 6.
And then what are we going to do to balance the balance sheet
equation?
Well, with revenues and expenses, my motto is,
if in doubt, stick it into retained earnings.
So this is an expense.
It goes into retained earnings.
Notice that we used up $6 worth of our assets--
or $6,000 worth of our asset and that we
balanced the balance sheet equation
by having $6,000 worth of rent expense.

Now, our third transaction is that we're
going to buy inventory of $10,000 on account.
Now, because we're buying it on account,
we're not using any cash right away.
So cash is not going to be affected here.
Inventory is going to go up by $10,000.
So we got $10,000 worth of inventory.
And then what are we going to do to balance the balance sheet
equation?
So this-- we're buying it on account,
which means that we incurred an account payable for that.
So again, the balance sheet equation balance is there.
Now we've got our revenue transaction here.
And what I ask students to do here, please,
is split the revenue transaction first based on revenues.
And then, in transaction 4A, we'll
put any kind of costs associated with the revenues
or any kind of expenses associated with the revenues.
So we sold half of our inventory.
We got $20,000.
Always keep track of cash.
They also gave us an accounts receivable.
And then what is that?
That's going to be revenue.
So when in doubt, balance the transaction
by putting the difference into retained earnings.
Now we're going to think about what expenses were associated
with this transaction.
It says we sold half the inventory in 4A.
How do we reflect the fact that only half of our inventory
is still with us after this transaction?
So we're going to remove $5,000 worth of our inventory.
So half of it goes to this customer.
The other half is still with us.
And then we want to balance the balance sheet equation.
And again, when in doubt, stick it in retained earnings.
We got $5 COGS, and that's my acronym for cost of goods sold.
So that's the expense of selling that inventory.

Fifth transaction, we paid wages payable in cash of $6,000.
So keep track of cash.
Cash goes down by $6,000.
We accrued $4,000 of wages.
What's that going to be?
So we have a liability, a promise to pay our workers
$4,000 sometime in the future.
That's a wage payable.
Now, what do we do to make the balance sheet equation balance?
Again, this is going to be a wage expense.
And notice that we pay the workers $6,000
in cash, $4,000 in a promise to pay them in the future.
So our wage expense is going to be $10.
Now, notice, it's a little tricky to see at first,
but we've got assets go down by 6 and liabilities go up by 4.
Stockholders' equity goes down by 10.
So minus 6 in assets equals minus 6 in liabilities
plus stockholders' equity.

And then at transaction six, we enter
into a contract with Julie's company
to sell the remaining inventory next year in year two.
And Julie's company pays us $6,000.
So first thing we want to do here is keep track of cash.
So we get $6,000.
Now, is this revenue?

Think about our test for revenue.
Have we done the work yet?
No, we haven't done the work.
We're not going to deliver these goods until this time
next year.
This is what's called a deferred revenue.
To balance the balance sheet equation,
we're going to put this in deferred revenue, which
tells us, in some sense, we owe Julie's
company $6,000 worth of goods.
And when we deliver those $6,000 worth of goods
to Julie's company next year, then our deferred revenue
will become regular revenue at that point.
It's kind of like newspaper subscriptions.
Those of you that still subscribe to the newspaper
these days, at the start of the year,
you'll give The New York Times or the Wall Street Journal
or whatever $50.
And then over the course of the year, as they deliver
you your newspaper, that deferred revenue for them
gradually turns into regular revenue.
And as they give you all of your newspapers,
they no longer owe you any newspapers
as part of that subscription.

Final transaction-- and we're going
to come back and look at deferred revenue
quite closely in our next class when we
talk about revenue recognition.
In our final transaction, we paid a dividend of $1,000.
So if we pay cash to somebody, cash goes down.
What are we going to do in the balance sheet equation
to balance it?
If in doubt, stick it in retained earnings.
This is a dividend.
This is not strictly part of earnings
as in retained earnings.
This is a transaction with our stockholder.
