
PROFESSOR: So now we're going to create the income statement
and the cash flow statement.
Then notice this picture.
The balance sheet is something that
is a statement of what's happening at a point in time.
So we've got a year zero balance sheet where
we had a bunch of zeros on it.
We had a year one balance sheet that we just computed.
And in between those, what links the year zero balance
sheet and the year one balance sheet
is the income statement and the statement of cash flows.
And we're going to see how those links are made
in the next couple of minutes.
So here's our spreadsheet again.
So we got ending balance at the bottom,
and we want to form an income statement.
Where would we look for the income statement?
That's right.
So income is going to be part of changes in retained earnings.
So our income statement are going
to be all the changes in retained earnings
except for the dividend, because, again, dividends are
not part of income or expense.
So remember, we had some rent expense.
We had some revenue.
We had that cost of goods sold.
We had a wage expense.
So the way an income statement would
look using this information is that we got revenue on the top,
then cost of goods sold goes below that
and gross margin, which is just a term that means revenue
minus cost of goods sold, and then
we have our operating expenses, which
are rent and wage expense.
And then subtracting those off of gross margin
gives us our net income, which is $3,000 for the first year.
Now, the third statement we're going to look at here
is the cash flow statement, also known
as SCF, the statement in cash flows.
And what the cash flow statement tells
us is that we started with a certain amount of cash.
We finished with a certain amount of cash.
And the cash flow statement will tell us how that cash changed,
and it's going to group it into three different types of cash.
And we're going to discuss these in more
detail in a later class, but the three types
are operating, investing, and financing cash flows.
So where do we see our cash flow statement in this spreadsheet?
So again, we see cash.
We started with zero in cash.
We ended up with 31,000 in cash.
So that's right.
Our cash flow statement are going
to be all those changes in cash that
took place during the year.
And just as a reminder, remember,
there was a stock issuance.
We had some prepaid rent.
We had some revenue.
We had some wages.
We had some deferred revenue.
And we had a dividend.
So this is not important to know right now,
but we start with cash as zero.
We've got $8 of cash flows from operations,
which is the cash we collected from our customers,
the rent we paid, and the wages we paid.
We didn't have any cash from investment.
Cash from investment would be like
if we bought a building or something like that.
We'll cover cash from investment later.
And then we had quite a bit of cash from financing.
Remember, we raised money in our IPO, so to speak.
We raised $24,000.
And at the end of the period, we paid our dividend.