
PROFESSOR: So if we summarize our performance measures
for year 1, we had net income of $3,000.
We had cash flow from operations or CFO of $8,000.
And then what we call accruals or estimates
is the difference between net income minus cash
flow from our operations.
So in our first year, we had negative accruals of minus 5.
We're going to come back and talk about those accruals
in our next class.
So one thing I want to point out to you before we
move on much further is we're using the balance sheet
equation.
So as we just saw, the balance sheet equation
for the transaction, the owners contributed $24,000 in cash.
As we see, cash goes up as part of total assets.
And we see contributed capital goes up also $24,000 as part
of stockholders' equity.
Now, historically, accounts have used a journal entry system
that has debits or credits.
So the journal entry for the transaction--
the owners contributed $24,000 in cash--
was cash goes up.
It's a debit amount of $24,000.
And then contributed capital goes up.
It's a credit amount of $24,000.
So this is an older system that you'll
see people using some days.
But notice that you can sort of map them directly
into the newer system that we're using.
The reason that we use our system, the balance sheet
equation, is the balance sheet equation
is very friendly with Excel spreadsheets.
And you can use an Excel spreadsheet
to do your accounting in a very transparent way, whereas if you
try to do this with a journal entry system,
it becomes more confusing.
So this is not on the exam.
We're going to be using the balance sheet equation system
throughout the whole semester.
But I do want you to understand that there
is this alternative system, which
is debits, credits, and journal entries as an aside.

Now, takeaways for this class--
so we started off by discussing some accounting definitions.
We introduce three fundamental accounting equations, so
our friend the balance sheet equation, the net income
equation.
And we also introduce the retained earnings equation,
which as you remember says beginning retained earnings
plus income minus dividends equals any retained earnings.
And then we came up with this idea of accrual accounting
that we're going to look at more deeply in
the next class or two.
But the whole idea of accrual accounting
is we're trying to measure performance regardless of when
cash comes in or cash goes out.
So over the course of this course,
we're going to use the balance sheet equation as our tool
to understand the impact of transactions
on financial statements.
And at this point in this class, please
practice some transactions, please do your homework.
You should be able to easily identify
what's an asset, what's a liability, what's
shareholders' equity.
And you want to become comfortable with accrual
accounting and comfortable with entering balance sheet
equation entries.