
PROFESSOR: So the last two slides in the slide deck
are things that I want you to sort of take a look at yourself
and think about.
The first slide is about revenue,
and it shows that revenue can be recognized
at the same time we get cash.
We can get cash before recognizing revenue.
And we can get cash after recognizing revenue.
So if you buy a hot dog from a street vendor,
you give the hot dog vendor cash,
and he's going to get earnings for that transaction.
So that's just a cash transaction.
Other transactions, like the deferred revenue transaction
that we saw in the Peters Company,
is we're going to get some cash ahead of time.
But since we haven't done anything for our customer yet,
we're going to have a liability for deferred revenue.
And then, in a subsequent period when we do that work,
the liability will go away.
And then, at that point, we'll get retained earnings
from recognizing revenue.
Now, the final situation is we could get cash
after earning revenue.
And again, we've seen this as an example with Peters.
So we sell somebody something.
We've done the work, so the earnings process is complete.
We know that we're going to collect cash
from this customer.
So we get revenue.
We recognize retained earnings.
But they give us an accounts receivable,
so we're not getting cash revenue.
We're getting credit revenue.
And then, in a subsequent period,
they're going to get rid of that accounts receivable
and pay us our cash.
So take a look at this slide and think about some examples
where you could fill in the slide with different examples.
Similarly, expense recognition-- because revenue recognition can
happen either at the same time as cash--
you could get cash before revenue recognition
or you can get cash after revenue recognition
because, by the matching principle,
we're recognizing expenses at the same period
as the associated revenue.
So again, if you pay your employees in cash when they
do the work, cash goes down.
You got wage expense.
If we rent a building ahead of time, we get a prepaid asset.
Cash goes down.
And it's not into the future, when
we use that building, prepaid asset goes away
and then we recognize an expense.
And then the final situation is like wages payable.
So the employees have done the work for us,
but we're not going to pay them until sometime in the future.
So we're not paying out any cash expenses.
And then, sometime in the future,
we're going to pay our employees two weeks from now
or a month from now or whatever.
And at that point, we no longer have a wages payable
and we no longer have the associated cash either.
So this just sort of illustrates the way the accrual accounting
system works.
Again, I encourage you to take a look at these two slides
and think of some other examples,
examples you may be familiar with,
of revenue recognition and expense recognition.