
PROFESSOR: Now, the Black-Scholes equation
that we just derived is one of the most important equations
in modern finance, and the derivation only took us
two slides.
But I pulled a fast one.
Can you tell where?
The derivation, remember, assumed
that the number of shares was constant, right?
But then we found that the number of shares that we needed
for delta in order to do our hedge
was partial to V with respect to S.
But when we solve the equation, we
find out that V depends on S and on time,
and therefore, delta is going to depend on S and time.
And therefore, delta actually isn't constant at all.
So this contradicts something that
was an essential assumption of our derivation.
Now, we're going to do a little bit of a digression
here, and let me give you the short version
so that you know our result is OK.
The derivation was a little shaky.
So we're going to go through it more carefully,
and we'll be much more solid ground,
but the end result is the same.
So the derivation I showed you was very quick,
it was very slick, but it a cheat.
It was wrong.
The intuition was right, and you can apply similar intuition
in other cases.
But there's some deeper mechanisms going on
that we should take a look at, and actually, it's
pretty nice too.
So what was the problem?
The problem was that when we had a differential that we should
have taken, the differential of delta S,
we just said, oh, that's delta dS.
That is, we treated the delta as being constant.
What we should have said is, hm, maybe we
need a generalized chain rule to apply to cases where
we have a product rule, where we have
a product of two processes or two random variables.
So at a minimum, we should have been cautious
and at least written the differential of delta S
is delta dS plus Sd delta plus maybe a higher order
term, d delta dS.
And then we'd have to figure out what each of those things
means.

So to do this right, we're going to bring in one
extra financial instrument.
We started with an underlying, the stock,
and we had options, or our general derivative V,
and now we're going to include cash
because if you think about it, I said things are growing
at the risk-free rate, and we're dynamically
rebalancing our portfolio, but we're doing it with what money?
We need some cash to be able to buy and sell shares
to execute our delta hedge.
So our dynamic trading strategy that we're going to look at
is as follows.
We're going to buy and hold our derivative.
We're going to rebalance our stock position,
but it's going to be self-financing,
so we're going to start out with no money, but a lot of credit.
We're going to assume that we could lend and borrow
at the risk-free rate, an arbitrary amount,
and that the stock purchases and sales are funded directly
from that account.
So if I'm going to short sell shares worth $10,000,
I take in $10,000 to the cash account,
and I've sold short the shares.
If I need to buy long $20,000 worth of stock, I buy it,
and my account balance in the cash account
goes down by $20,000.
And if I'm earning interest at the risk-free rate,
that accrues to the cash account.
And if I'm borrowing money, if the balance in my cash account
is negative, then I need to pay interest.
But interest, either way, regardless of the sign,
it's always going to be the risk-free rate times
dt times the quantity in the cash account.
Now, I've made a bunch of assumptions,
so let's be explicit about what they are.
These are all idealizations for the real world.
First, I assume I have unlimited credit,
so I can lend or borrow as much as I want.
I'm assuming that I lend and borrow at the same rate,
at the risk-free rate.
In reality, it costs a little more to borrow,
and you earn a little bit less when you lend.
I'm assuming that the stock can be traded
in fractional quantities, so I'm not
going to restrict delta to be an integer.
On the other hand, so is that a bad assumption?
Sure, because we can't really trade fractional shares easily,
but in an institutional setting, we're
not buying a single option.
In fact, a single option contract in the United States
is on 100 shares of stock, and we might buy many contracts.
So we can be concerned about rounding errors,
but generally, this won't be an issue because we're not
doing this for a single option.
We're assuming that we have full use
of the proceeds of short sales, something
that is actually limited because we have to keep collateral.
We're assuming that there are no dividends for this,
no transaction costs, no delays, no market impact.
So a whole bunch of frictionless trading assumptions, just
for purposes of our derivation.