
PROFESSOR: Now, I'd like you to give you a picture
and have you keep this picture in mind, because it's
a discrete picture, and then we're
going to let delta t go to 0 again.
But in many ways, a discrete picture
is important and gives us some insight
into what's going on in the Black-Scholes world.
So what I'd like to do is think of each of these segments
as being related to a given trading period.
And we'll think of this as being a trading day.
And in fact, this is how many option traders and market
makers do trade.
They think of re-hedging, let's say, once per period
or that might be once per day.
So what I want to do is I want to think
about opening an initial position here at the beginning.
And then there's intraday period and then the end of the day
comes and we observe the closing prices at the end of the day.
I'm going to assume that very close to the end,
let's say a minute 30 seconds before the equity markets
close, that there's a lot of activity and liquidity
in the markets and that without waiting for the shares
to close, they're not going to move very much
but that I can buy or sell shares
to set a new delta position to have for the following day.
So here's what I assume.
At the end of each day, I'm going
to observe the price of the underlying,
but I'm also going to use that information to construct
a new hedge position.
And then I'll wait for the next trading day
and at the end of that day, I'll repeat the process.
So I've broken this set of steps into two parts.
One of them is that when the market is open,
the quantities that we have are held fixed,
but the prices change as the market moves.
So prices change, but we're not doing any trading
during the day.
At the end of the day, the prices no longer move.
I'm assuming they move very, very little during the time
it takes us to do this.
At the end of the day, as I rebalance,
the prices are held fixed, but the quantities change.
So from an accounting perspective,
the rebalancing is just exchanging
one asset for another.
We're exchanging cash for stock of equal value.
OK.
So we've got two things.
We've got the end of day rebalancing and fixed price
and we have the intraday market evolution dynamic stock price
evolution, dynamic option price evolution while we're holding
the quantities constant.
And when we look at the real world prices,
we see this is an example, a screenshot taken from Bloomberg
where we can see the price in Spotify
over several intraday periods.
You can see that on some days, the movements are jagged
and look stochastic.
And I've left out the overnight period.
And the next day begins more or less
where the other one started.
But that's not always the case.
Sometimes we do observe jumps and there are very big changes
from the close on one day to the beginning of the next day.
And we're either going to be excluding that
or it won't really matter because we're
going to be jumping from one end of day close
to the next end of day close.
So whether this dropped immediately on the open
or at some point during the day, the main driver for our results
is going to be where it ends up on the following day.

So
Let's leave the derivatives out of it for a moment
and look at a rebalancing condition
for this self-financing portfolio.
So let's let x be a portfolio that initially has value 0.
But again, I've got a lot of credit.
So it can have stocks and bonds.
And I'm going to just call our interest bearing instruments
cash.
Instead of money market, instead of a bond,
I'll refer to it as cash.
So let's assume that I have a portfolio x.
X is the value of the portfolio.
And I can have stock in quantity q
and I can have cash in quantity C. S is the value of the stock.
M is the value of money, which will
grow with the risk free rate.
So when I initially set up my portfolio,
I started with no money.
I'm going to end up with no money.
So my initial setup doesn't require any money.
And subsequent rebalancing never changes the portfolio value.
That is, if I want to be long stock at a positive price,
I'm going to need to have a negative cash
balance to finance it.
If I'm going to be short stock and this is negative,
I'll have positive cash.
And the amount of cash is determined
as C is going to equal minus qS over M, the value of money.
So it's as simple as that.
When we look at rebalancing at the end of a day, so
at the end of a day, the prices aren't changing.
And I look at the value from post re-hedging
compared to pre re-hedging where I changed
the quantities of stock.
What do I get?
Well, simple arithmetic.
So I've got S times the change in quantity
for the trade I do for re-hedging plus M times
the change in quantity in cash.
That's the change in value of the portfolio.
But because everything-- none of the prices are changing,
we're just shifting one asset into another.
That value is equal to 0.
Now, let me just rewrite that.
Because what I'd like to do is I'd
like to shift the end points a little bit.
So instead of ST and MT here, I'd
really like to have ST minus 1 and MT minus 1.
Because these represent a change in value
in the future from T minus 1 to T. And I'd like this to be--
I like to think of this as being a random variable,
and I want this to be non-anticipating.
So I'd like this to be at the beginning of my end point
rather than at the end of the end point over here.
So I can do that at the cost of adding two new terms just
to cancel the stuff I added.
And that gives me these terms down below.
And this is just arithmetic.
This is an exact equality.
Now if we think about turning this into infinitesimals
in continuous time and we recognize
that this whole thing is 0, we have the following equation
that represents self-financing.
Sdq, which is up here, plus MdC plus dSdq plus dMdC
now is equal to 0.
So this equation here holds when our rebalancing
is self-financing, when there's no new money coming in or going
out.