
PROFESSOR: Now we're almost ready to do Black-Scholes.
Let's consider our portfolio.
But now we're going to augment pi by including cash.
So before I wrote down that pi was V minus delta S.
And that was partly to lure you toward the answer.
Let's be much more open minded about what the number of shares
is, and just leave it as a generic q,
and yet put in a plus sign here for Q.
So we're going to have to solve for everything.
So my general rule for the portfolio
is, I have the value of 1 option plus the number of shares
times the value per share plus the amount of cash
times the value of the cash, and that's
the value of a portfolio.
So what happens to this portfolio as we rebalance?
Well, we think of our picture.
And we've got the rebalancing.
And we have the dynamics between two different periods.
So the rebalancing, we know that the value doesn't
change by accounting rules.
We're just changing one asset for another.
So what happens between two rebalancings,
that is, over the time scale of one market day?
Well, we're holding-- remember our picture,
over the market day, we're holding our quantities fixed,
and the prices are changing.
So the change in value in the portfolio
is a change in value of the option
plus this quantity is held fixed, the stock changes value,
the cash balance is held fixed, and possibly
the money changes value where we're earning interest.
If we go to the continuous time limit, and go to differentials,
we see that we can write that as d pi, as dV
plus d of qS plus CM.
That is, I'm just taking the differential of my top line.
Now, let's expand it out.
This is dV plus--
and let's keep everything from our product rule.
I have qdS plus Sdq, which I've put out here.
I have C plus dqdS.
I have CdM plus MdC plus dCdM.
And I've grouped these this way for a reason.
These four terms are just a self-financing condition
that we saw previously.
So these four terms together are all
present on the right-hand side, but collectively they equal 0.
So our expression gets a lot simpler.
d pi is dV plus qdS plus CdM.
Now we recognize that dM, the change in the value of money,
is just our rMdt.
That's the risk-free rate.
Finally, we can take CM--
which, we don't really want to see money
in our equation anyways.
Come back up here, and we can replace CM
by pi minus V minus qS, which I've done right here.
So now I have an expression for d pi.
dV plus qdS plus r times this quantity times dt.
Now we want to look for a dynamic trading strategy
where the number of shares that we have, q, not only
is we're not going to assume it's constant.
We expect it to be changing.
In fact, that's going to give us to rule for how
we can execute these hedges.
That's going to give us the rule for how we can actually
eliminate risk.
So the reason we can do this, and we
would expect this to work, is there's
only one stochastic driver in the entire problem,
and that's the stock.
So we have that dS term.
And we know that the stock moves,
but the value of the derivative is random, the value of V
random through its dependence on S. So we've got one driver.
We have two, possibly three instruments.
Maybe we can cancel it out in a dynamic way.
So let's take a look.
I'm going to take my previous expression.
And all I'm going to do is, in place of dV,
I'm going to use Ito's lemma.
So I'm going to have this set of terms, dt plus partial of V
with respect to S times dS.
And this term over here comes along
from the ride from the previous slide.
Notice that, if I group my dS terms together--
OK, I have this is a dt term, this is a dt term,
I've got my dS terms here.
Can I make this coefficient go away?
Yes, we can.
If we define q to be minus partial of V with respect to S.
And that corresponds to what we called minus delta before.
But now, notice that we're not assuming
that anything is constant.
In fact, we're requiring that we trade such that q always
is equal to partial of V with respect to S
so that the risk is always balanced.
We can do that instantaneously.
When the prices change, we might need to retrade.
So this dynamic rehedging lets us eliminate risk
at the cost of possibly doing a lot of trading
over very small intervals.

Finally, with this choice, we can go through and simplify.
And we'll find that we get the same Black-Scholes.
Equation again.
This term here goes away.
Everything else we group together, has a dt in it.
We look for the coefficient of dt and set
that equal to 0 because we've said d pi is not changing.
And we finally have-- because remember
d pi is not changing now because pi includes the cash.
And the interest is all incorporated
as part of our portfolio.
So we started with a portfolio with initial value 0.
It's self-financing.
There's no money coming in or out.
There's no risk.
So it began with value 0.
It stays 0.
The rate of change is 0.
And that tells us that this big expression in parentheses
has to be 0 for all time and for all values of S
where the option is alive.
That's prior to expiration.
And that gives us the Black-Scholes.
Partial differential equation once again,
this time without cheating.
So the lesson to take away from this, apart
from two different derivations for getting Black-Scholes.
Equation is this notion of, number one,
that we have a self-financing portfolio, that this
is a self-contained closed world where we're able to rebalance.
And because we have these multiple instruments and only
one source of risk, we're able to cancel out the risk.
By looking at the rebalancing, though,
even though we're back continuous time,
by having broken it into two parts--
the rebalancing where we hold prices fixed and change
quantities and the evolution period
where we hold the quantities fixed
and the prices can change--
that becomes hard to distinguish if we do everything
immediately in continuous time.
But it is important that we do things in a nonparticipating
way.
So these are discrete.
That is, we need to observe, and then trade, observe,
and then trade, no matter how small the time intervals.
We can't do it in the opposite order.
If we could see the future prices and then trade on them,
that would be a terrific source of riches.
Unfortunately, real markets don't work that way.
And our mathematics needs to respect that.