
PROFESSOR: Let's summarize a few key formulas.
Ito processes are our generalized random walks,
our generalized processes that have the form a dt plus b dB
where little a and little b are, in general, functions
of x and t.
x, in our example of stock prices, is s- is price--
but it may take different values.
Ito's formula tells us, for stochastic processes of the Ito
type, Ito's formula from Ito's lemma
tells us how to compute differentials.
And they have an extra term relative to the ordinary chain
rule.
We have first partial with respect to t,
first partial with respect to x, and then we
have a second partial with respect to x but times
dt instead of dx squared.
We remember the heuristic-- that every time we see
a d b squared, it's worth a dt.
Every time we would have seen a dx squared,
it's worth a b squared dt, where little b is the same
as the coefficient up here.
Our most common and most popular Ito process
is the standard stock price formula
that's written as dS over S is mu dt plus sigma db,
or multiply thing through by S so that we can correctly
identify the coefficients a and b,
we can write this is dS is mu S dt plus sigma S db.
We saw-- and you should check and be familiar with this--
that if we apply Ito's lemma to the function f equals log S,
we derive, on the right-hand side,
that the differential of log S-- this
is an exact differential on the left-hand side,
and on the right-hand side is an Ito process
with constant coefficients.
The sigma parameter now doesn't have an S in here,
and the mu is shifted by an amount
minus sigma squared over 2.
To derive the Black-Scholes equation,
we combine this stock price evolution
with a hedging algorithm where we
pick a number of shares delta that's
always equal to partial of V with respect to S
to hold short.
We assume that our portfolio grows at the risk-free rate.
And we're able to eliminate risk by dynamically hedging.
And that tells us what the value of a derivative
must be in order to avoid arbitrage.
It's given by solutions to this equation.
What I want to do is just show a couple
of tweaks that we can make to the equation.
And then we're going to turn to looking
at how to solve the equation.
The way we're going to do it is, we're
going to simplify the equation.
This is pretty complicated to solve, and along the way,
we're going to turn it into a much simpler differential
equation.
We'll take a look at that equation for a while.
It's called the diffusion equation.
And then we'll recover it back in our original Black-Scholes
variables.
First, some of the overall properties.
The equation is linear.
And that means that the sum of two solutions,
or any linear combination of solutions,
is always a solution.
Now, in boundary value in partial differential equations,
we sometimes look at initial values.
We sometimes look at boundary values on the sides.
But what's special about our application for finance--
it's a little bit different from what you would
see in a typical PDE textbook.
Is, instead of initial conditions,
we're going to specify a terminal condition.
That is, when we think about options,
we know what they're worth when they expire.
We want to know what they're worth before expiration.
The payoff is contractually determined at a future date,
and we're going to have to work backwards in time.
Luckily, we'll see that the signs in our equation
work out just right for that.
Now, there are a whole bunch of other assumptions
that go into this.
In particular, we're looking at a special stock price model--
namely, geometric Brownian motion.
But a lot of what we said could go through
for other kinds of processes.
We can change the process to some of the examples
I showed you earlier.
And we might ask about generalizing further
where some of the things that we've held constant
perhaps become, themselves, dynamic over time.
What happens if volatility changes
over time, which seems to be a real-world phenomenon
in financial markets?
What if there are limits on the allowed prices?
There are lots of generalizations we could make.
Let's take a look at a few easy ones.
One of them is that I neglected dividends.
And if you've studied options before,
you know that discrete dividends are a big deal.
There's a theorem about early exercise.
Now, the dividends I'm going to discuss here
are not discrete dividends, which we usually would
handle with different tools.
But I want to think about a continuous dividend
yield, which is one way that we typically
model indices or portfolios.
We think that if there are a bunch of stocks that
get dividends at different times,
we'll just kind of average this out smoothly.
The important thing is that, if dividends arrive at a rate D,
we might think that the dividends are
kind of offsetting the interest rate.
But there are two reasons--
there are two places where the interest rate enters
the equation, and only one place where the dividends show up.
So it's not just a shift in the risk-free rate.
The holder of the stock gets dividends,
but the holder of the option does not get the dividends.
That's the whole thing behind the timing of early exercise.
The Black-Scholes equation is modified,
but it's not just a straight substitution of r.
It's a substitution in this term,
because the stock is earning dividends.

We could think of currency options,
which are on foreign currency.
And we don't just trade suitcases full of cash.
We trade interest-bearing instruments.
On currency options, we receive a foreign interest rate, which
is equivalent to a cash inflow.
Again, we've got to change to our cash.
And again, it's not just a straight-out substitution
of the interest rates.
Here, we've got to change to r in this place.
This r stays the same.
We have another adjustment we can make in commodity options,
where we have a cost of carry.
It doesn't cost anything to store a stock option.
It does cost something if you have oil
and you have options on oil.
Having an oil option doesn't cost anything, but having oil
does cost something.
Having gold does cost something-- to store it,
to have security for it, possibly to transport it.
So when we look at physical commodities,
we typically include a cost of carry for the duration
of the contract at a rate q.
And guess what?
That shows up in this term.
And once again, the other interest rate term
is unchanged.

Options on futures are an interesting case,
and we can get an equation called
the Black equation, which Fischer Black did on his own,
without Scholes.
And we do this by changing the value
from the spot to the forward price.
Keep in mind that there is discounting.
We can think about present values.
And in fact, we'll see that one reason there's
a lot of complexity in the Black-Scholes equation
is because we didn't build discounting
into it to begin with.
You can see that the equation simplifies
a lot if we were to set the interest rate equal to 0.
But there are two things we might potentially discount.
One of them is S. The other one is V.
Let's take a look.
If we change variables so that we
do things in terms of the forward price instead
of the spot price, I can introduce this script F,
which I've done because we used F
before for a general function.
Here, I'd like this F to represent
the forward price that's related to the spot
price in the usual way.
And we substitute in-- use the ordinary chain
rule, because there's nothing special about this pre-factor.
F and s are both stochastic, but e to the r t minus t is not.
And we get a simpler equation.
One of our terms from our original Black-Scholes equation
dropped out.
And that's telling us, what that equation really was doing
was accounting for the fact that we
should think about the present value rather than the spot
value.
In those terms, my Black-Scholes equation now
has only a term with a time derivative,
and with a second derivative with respect to the under line,
the first derivative term went away.
And I still have the constant term that's left over.
Now, what I would like to do is, I
would like to compare this with another well-known equation
called the diffusion equation, which I've written
down here at the bottom.
The diffusion equation-- you'll notice both of these equations
have a term partial of V with respect to t.
The next term-- they both have a 1/2.
They both have a second derivative with respect
to another variable over here.
This has a pre-factor.
This one doesn't.
This has a plus sign.
This one has a minus sign.
And of course, there's this extra leftover term right here.
But the first two terms are intriguing.
And we're going to go a bit further and see
if we can get the original Black-Scholes
equation to be related to a diffusion equation.
