
PROFESSOR: Now let's look at using the Ito calculus
and the tools of continuous time finance in setting
of fixed-income modeling.
So far, we've looked mostly at the classic examples of stock
as a random continuous time process,
looking at the evolution of the stock price,
and we've looked at derivative pricing in terms
of an option on the stock.
When we go to the world of bonds,
we'll find a bunch of interesting things.
First of all, interest rates are dynamic.
Now, when we saw interest rates in looking at stock options
and deriving the Black-Scholes equation,
there was a single variable r, which
was held to be a constant, the risk-free rate.
In fact, interest rates change over time,
and interest rates change over time unpredictably.
So they're in fact random variables, not just parameters.
Interest rates aren't tradable.
So although we'll have a random driver that, in many ways,
will have the same properties and same kind of Ito
description as we had for stock prices,
our hedging arguments won't necessarily
go through the same way, because we can't trade
interest rates themselves.
Interest rates are the term structure.
That is, there are different interest rates associated
with different maturities of bonds and, of course,
different levels of creditworthiness.
So even if we're looking at risk-free bonds that
have no default risk, they may still have risk in the sense
that market rates, interest rates can vary.
There's a term structure.
So we don't find the same interest rate
on a one-year bond, a two-year bond, and a 30-year bond.
These term structures themselves change over time.
And they're a very important subject for modeling.
And they not only change over time,
but they do so in ways that are unpredictable.
So it's natural to model the entire curve not just
a single point or a single interest rate
as being stochastic.
The bond prices are determined in relation
to these interest rates.
But there may be a lot of bonds associated with a single rate
or with a particular set of rates.
So there are many interrelationships
among the different interest rates
and across the entire yield curve.
And interest rate derivatives on futures, bond options, interest
rate swaps--
a whole variety of other derivative contracts
depend on all of these features.
So here's a snapshot just taken from Bloomberg
of a bunch of US securities.
And we see that there are securities that trade.
They have different interest rates.
They're quoted in price.
They're quoted in yield terms.
They're quoted with different expirations.
And we can find this across various sovereign debt markets.
And of course, the corporate market is even larger.
Here's an example of what I meant by the yield curve.
We're looking at the interest rate, the yield to maturity,
for US bonds.
And this curve shows us the interest rate
in percent on the y-axis against the term
or tenor on the x-axis.
So we see a characteristic shape where
things are rising over time.
We get higher interest rates if we go farther out.
But also notice, there's some curvage area here.
We're convex here, and we become concave.
There's a point of inflection.
If I look at a different point in time--
for example, I look at a point one year prior
or a month prior, I might see a different shape
and a different level.
So this curve up here, notice, is downward-sloping.
It's an inverted curve at the beginning, and then it rises.
So all of these rates are higher than the ones down below.
So the curve is moved up.
But it's also changed in shape, and it's changed in direction.
So what are some features that are
consistent with basic principles of finance?
What are the mathematical tools we have to describe them?
And then, what kinds of predictions can we make?
That's a subject of fixed-income modeling.
And we can pick different kinds of variables,
which may be closely associated, but may
have different interpretations.
Now, suppose we want to take a look at how to price bonds
in the same way that we looked at how
to price stock options already.
Now, the pricing of bonds has a few twists.
First of all, which interest rate should we use?
What should they depend on?
There's not a single risk-free rate
that showed up in our calculations
before that we could use for discounting
or for risk-neutral pricing.
Now, risk-free bonds of different maturities
all could lay an equal claim to being the risk-free rate.
It's tempting to take a look at the short rate, the shortest
maturity bonds, but--
because they seem to be special because they're
at one end of the curve rather than some arbitrary
point in the middle.
But really, between any two points in the curve,
we can ask what a view that represents for how rates
might evolve in the future.
And they all contribute to our notion
of what we should think about as being
the relevant risk-free rate, especially when we
have multi-period problems or multiple time horizons.
We can't just content ourselves with picking
a short overnight rate saying that's it;
let's be done with it.
So interest rates aren't constant in time.
They're not deterministic.
We do need to model them as random variables.
But we also need to keep in mind that what
gets traded are bonds, are generally bonds, or derivatives
on bonds or on interest rates, but not the interest rates
themselves.
Those can't be traded.
So the bonds come in-- and I'll talk mostly about bonds.
But bonds come in a variety of maturities.
And because we have multiple instruments all trading based
on the same kind of principles, we
might expect there to be some no-arbitrage constraints
on the relative prices of bond.
So here's an idea.
What we'd like to do is look for a way to price all bonds,
or all bonds from a particular class,
of all maturities in a way that avoids arbitrage and that
minimizes or leads to a fixed number of stochastic factors.
We could try to model each bond independently,
but that would not be a great description of reality
because they do have commonalities.
But also, we really want to be able to take advantage
in thinking about portfolios and thinking about possibilities
for arbitrage and how no arbitrage
can inform pricing relationships, about how
the bonds that are connected to common rates,
they have relationships among them.
So let's take a look at the simplest example.
We're going to imagine that we have bonds that do depend
on a single, random variable.
And that random variable, we'll say
will be what we call the short rate, which
is a-- think of not just as being an overnight rate,
but as being an instantaneous spot interest
rate, the rate we can get right now for infinitesimal duration.
So this isn't tradable.
You can't buy it.
You can't buy a bond for that.
You can't invest in it.
But it's kind of clear that it might be approximately
equal to what we would see for very short-term, say,
overnight rates.
So let's think that that might be
one of the variables of interest in describing our yield curve
and describing bonds, certainly, what
they're worth a very short period of time
would inform arbitrages.
So let's imagine that we have a variable
that we'll call y for the short term--
this short instantaneous rate.
So let's think that we want to have a pricing formula where
we have the price of a bond; let's call it V.
It depends on time.
It depends on the current time.
It depends on big T--
I'll let it be the maturity of the bond.
So let's think of that as being a fixed time in the future.
It's a parameter of the bond; it's not a variable.
And y, little y where I've written a subscript t
to remind us that it's time dependent-- to be
our random variable.
And let's let y be described by an Ito process.
So dy is something of the form a dt plus bdB.
So in this structure, what we're doing is
we're imagining that the short rate, y,
which is an observable, is nevertheless
described by an Ito process, and the value
of bonds of all maturities depend on that variable.
It might depend on other things too.
But let's start with the one-factor picture.
And let's see where that leads us.
