
PROFESSOR: So how can we generalize
the work we've done so far to this new setting?
How do we find a partial differential equation that
describes the prices of bonds?
Remember that in the case of stock options,
we had a definite underlying that was tradable,
and we built a portfolio of the stock with the derivative.
But here we have a whole bunch of bonds,
they're all on an equal footing, and none of them
is actually the random variable of interest.
So the thing that we know that's described by an Ito process
is the short rate, and the prices depend on that.
So how can we generalize things?
How can we set up a relationship that could lead to a PDE?
What kind of instruments can we use for hedging?
Now what we'd like to do is first,
let's count our stochastic degrees of freedom.
We've got one.
We have a single short rate.
And of course, this generalizes for more sophisticated models,
but let's just start with that.
It's not tradable, but we have a whole bunch
of bonds, all of which depend on that rate.
Since there are multiple bonds, they all
have a dependence on that single factor,
if we put them together in a portfolio
and we think about dynamically rebalancing the portfolio,
it should be possible to cancel out the risk
and determine a PDE that gives us the relative relationship
among bonds.
How many bonds?
Why don't we start with two?
That would let us cancel the common source of risk
to both of them.
Which two?
Take your pick.
So let's see what we can do.
We're going to start with the one-factor model,
and we're going to assume that all the bond
prices depend on this single stochastic variable,
the short rate.
So what we'll do is we'll take two zero-coupon bonds
of different maturities.
We'll think of them as being T1 and T2 and the values
as being the V1 and V2.
And we'll create a dynamic portfolio
that's going to be risk-free.
Where do we start?
With Ito's lemma.
So for each bond, Ito's formula tells us
that the DV, the differential for the value of the bond,
is given by partial of V with respect
to t times dt plus partial of V with respect
to y dy plus the Ito term, which here I've
grouped with the coefficient of dt that's
given by the usual form, b squared over 2 second partial
of V with respect to y.
So keep in mind now that this is analogous to what
we saw for stocks where s is replaced by y,
and the b squared is going to depend on the particular model
that we have for the short interest rate.
But our portfolio doesn't consist of any y's ,
it's only going to consist of v's.
Let's see how that goes.

So we're going to do is let's build
a portfolio with q1 bonds of value 1 and q2 bonds value 2,
and we'll call this value oi, and we'd
like to eliminate risk.
Well, we can do that in exactly the same way
that we did before, by choosing an appropriate ratio of q1
and q2.
Now keep in mind, when we looked at the stock option case,
we thought of keeping a single option in a variable number
of shares of stock, but there was
no reason we had to do that except partly,
historical interest, and partly, the realities of trading
in the market, which is that stock is
much more liquid than options.
But we could have held one share of stock
in our hedging argument.
It would've gone through exactly the same way
if we'd varied the number of options that we had.
And in fact, the overall scale doesn't matter.
What matters is the ratio of the number
of shares of one instrument relative to another.
So the same thing holds here.
But this time it's actually a little bit clearer,
because v1 and v2 are on equal footing.
So if I build a portfolio with q1 units of bond 1,
q2 units of bond 2 that have maturities t1 and t2,
and I choose these ratios in this particular way--
that are given by the ratios that
look like what we previously called the delta in the case
of the stock option--
then, and if I apply Ito's formula to this portfolio,
I can cancel the risky terms.
I can cancel the coefficients of dy
and be left only with something in dt, the same way
that we eliminated risk in deriving the Black-Scholes
equation.
So what do we get?
By combining the portfolio in this way
with the specially chosen ratio of q1 to q2,
we can see that our portfolio pi earns the risk-free rate.
So instead of r times pi dt, now because it's
earning over an infinitesimal period of time
and y is the short-term interest rate,
I have the d pi, because it's risk-free,
is going to earn y dt times the value of that portfolio, pi.
So it's earning a risk-free rate at rate y.
If I expand the differentials and I
take account of the cancellation from q1 and q2,
the terms that don't cancel give me this expression.
I've got a sum over 1 and 2 for q sub i of dV dt
plus b squared over 2 second partial of V
with respect to y squared, all times dt.
So this left-hand side is all something
that's proportional to dt.
It's got a bunch of partial derivatives,
a bunch of quantities in front, and it's something
that's deterministic.
On the right-hand side, I also have something proportional
to dt.
It's y times the value of the portfolio itself.
So notice now the structure that we've got.
The last time we did this for deriving Black-Scholes,
we had a whole bunch of terms that
were all coefficients of dt.
We said the only way that that could hold
is if the coefficients of dt were themselves equal.
So that is, this summation here should
be equal to y times q1 v1 plus q2 v2.
Now notice that we've got a bunch of 1s and a bunch of 2s,
and they're separate.
So we have a bunch of terms that sum with q1 and v1,
and a bunch of other terms with q2 and v2.
And one of the standard techniques
for solving and organizing differential equations
is to separate variables.
So let's choose, not just the ratio of q1 over q2,
let's set the scale, let's pick a particular value.
So here's a convenient one.
If we take q1 to be 1 over--

let's see if I can get my pointer back.

If I can take q1 to be 1 over partial of V with respect to y,
assuming that's non-zero, and q2 to be
minus the similar kind of thing, you
notice these two choices will satisfy this ratio.
That's all I need.
And when I go back to my expression for Ito,
you see that that will be sufficient
when I multiply q1 times this term with v1 and q2
with that term to v2, that will cancel out the dy terms.
So this particular choice not only
cancels out the dy terms that's already given by this ratio,
but it lets us separate the v1 and the v2 terms completely.
So here's what we get.
Let's equate the coefficients of dt.
Let's group the terms together.
Let's put all the v1's on the left,
let's put all the v2's on the right.
And because that minus sign in front of q2,
we have the following nice symmetrical expression.
We have one equation in terms of two unknown prices, v1 and v2.
So I have this expression in v1 is equal to this expression
here in v2.
And let's look at the structure for a moment.
In the numerator, we see that most of these terms, these
are three of the four terms that showed up
in the Black-Scholes equation, partial of V with respect to t.
I've got a b squared over 2 second partial with respect
to y minus v1.
And then I've divided by partial of v1 with respect to y1.
That's my q.
And over here, I've got the same thing,
but just with all the subscripts 1 replaced by subscripts 2.
So it's different from Black-Scholes.
Before, I had an expression for a single variable v,
and I set it equal to 0.
In this case, I have two expressions, one of them in v1,
one of them in v2, and I set them equal to each other.
Neither of them is equal to 0.
So it doesn't look like we made a lot of progress.
Again, one equation for two unknowns, v1 and v2.
But let's think about the structure for a moment.
Because all the v1's and v2's are isolated--
and remember that the v1's and v2's
correspond to the prices of bonds of different maturities--
that really tells us something.
Because the expression on the left depends on T1,
the second expression depends on T2.
But these two expressions are equal to each other.
And the one on the left doesn't have any T2's, the one
on the right doesn't have T1's.
How could that be?
The only way that this expression can hold,
that we can have these two things
equal to each other, that this can be equal to this,
is if neither of them depends on T1 or T2.
That is, this entire ratio as well as this one
need to be constant.
They need to be independent of the particular bond.
They can't depend on the bond's maturity.
They can't depend on anything else for the bond.
They need to be something that depends only
on time and on the short rate, which
are the two things that they have in common.
Anything that's bonds specific can't appear.
So it's in the individual terms, the v1
and its partial derivatives are there,
but that particular grouping of partial derivatives
and all those different terms in the numerators
need to be such that all of the explicit things that
are bond-dependent cancel out.
So because each side needs to be independent
and they're both equal to each other,
we can give that thing that they're equal to a name.
And we'll call it f.
We'll call it f, and we'll say it can depend on t,
and it can depend on y.
So it's some unknown function.
It's not 0, but it is something that doesn't
depend on the individual bonds.
And in fact, this is not only true for bond 1 and bond 2,
which are arbitrary.
It has to be true for all of the bonds,
no matter what their maturities are.
So here's what we found.
Now we have a differential equation for the bond pricing.
We've got the equation for any bond with any subscript i,
we have this Black-Scholes-like equation,
partial of V with respect to t plus second derivative,
this our diffusion term, with b squared over 2--
b comes from the Ito process defining y--
minus yV.
Remember, this looks like our minus rV term in Black-Scholes.
But now instead of r, it's replaced
by y, which is dynamic.
It's not the constant risk-free rate.
It's the dynamical random variable.
And then I have this other term, f of y--
which is a function that we don't know, it's unspecified--
times the partial of V with respect to y,
that we get just by multiplying through and clearing
denominators.
And that whole thing is equal to 0.
And what do we have for a boundary condition?
These are zero coupon bonds that are typically
normalized by saying that at maturity, they
pay off $1 or one unit.
We can pick a different normalization if we'd like.
So they have the normalization, then at maturity,
they're equal to 1.
But at times prior, their value's
determined by this differential equation,
and the maturity is one of the defining features
of the particular bond.