
PROFESSOR: Is there a financial interpretation to the mystery
function f of t and y?
Well, here's one.
We can think of it in terms of the risk premium on the bond.
So the bond's Ito process can be written as usual.
From Ito's Lemma is dV something times dt plus something
times dy.
And let's put it in standard form.
We will rewrite it as something times dt plus something times
dB.
So the coefficient of dB is what we usually think of
is being the volatility.
And it's associated with the randomness.
If that coefficient were to go to 0,
the equation would be deterministic.
It would only depend.
It would have time evolution determined by dt.
But there wouldn't be any randomness associated with it.
So we can think of the deterministic piece
as telling us about the growth rate in the absence of risk
and this piece being associated with the risk.
So if we ask about the amount of excess
risk there is and the amount of--
excuse me-- the amount of risk there
is relative to the amount of excess return
above the risk-free rate, we can take
the value, the return on the bond, dV in a given period,
relative to what it would earn if it were risk free.
So if it were risk free, this would be equal to 0.
And then we divide it by the risk
to get the ratio of excess return per unit of risk.
And we have this expression.
And the coefficient of dt, in this case, in terms of a and b,
the coefficients from the Ito process,
and f, our unknown function, that particular combination
a plus f over b is given a name.
And it's called the market price of risk.
Now, we give it a symbol.
We'll call it eta.
So we can track it through some further manipulations
if we'd like.
But what are its properties?
Well, first of all, it doesn't depend on which bond
we look at.
It's going to be the same thing for all of the bonds.
And it represents the extra return
that we get per unit of randomness,
per extra coefficient of dB.
Unfortunately, it's not observable.
And it ends up being a fudge factor in lots of models.
This happens whenever the stochastic driver is not
something that's directly tradable.
That's where this uncertainty comes from.
In the case of our stock and our stock option,
the stock price was directly observable.
And we didn't have any ambiguity.
So common approaches are either to figure out
something that seems like it ought to be
a reasonable functional form.
We'd make or look for something that can be solved analytically
or to try to make empirical fits to market data.