
PROFESSOR: So let's put it together
and see what we can say about bond prices
and about yield curves.
So the bond pricing equation we have now,
under the set of assumptions we have,
takes this general form, where we
have some unknown parameters, alpha and y bar, that we
might fit from the data.
Let's assume that we've got this particular form.
And to solve this equation, we look
at separation of variables.
And we're going to try Ansatz, which
means that we're just going to take
we're going to guess a particular form
as a starting point and then see if we can refine what
those choices are.
The formal pick is inspired by the general idea
that bonds, if there were no randomness
and things were constant, should see
an exponential behavior in time and a linear dependence
in the exponent on the risk-free rate.
So let's assume that the function
y is in the form e to the f of t that depends only on t
and a term that's linear and y.
So we have a time-dependent function,
which is independent of y, minus y times another function
that's also independent of y.
And what we're going to do is apply the boundary conditions.
So the question we can ask is, in
this simple one-factor model, what kind of prices do we get?
What kind of term structures do we get?
Do we only get a rigid term structure?
Do we have different parameters where
we can have things that are upward sloping,
inverted curves, oscillating?
So what's possible?
What's not allowed?
That would be especially interesting.
And do we have enough degrees of freedom in our parameter
choices and in our model specification
to fit the market?
Well, in this particular example,
we can take a look at fit for some particular numerical
examples.
And depending on how we tune the parameters,
we can get a variety of behaviors.
We can get a curve which is upward sloping.
We can also generate a curve which is downward sloping.
And we can even generate a curve which is inverted,
which begins by being convex, rising,
and then becomes downward sloping.
So there are a variety of behaviors we can have.
This is the simplest model.
And it's a bit too simple for applying to the real world.
But this shows you how we can apply these techniques to match
different kinds of assumptions about processes
to observable bond prices and their yields in the marketplace
and then use what we observe in the marketplace in turn
to go back and try to find what might be appropriate not
only Ito process for the short rate
but how many other factors might be required
or advisable to include in our modeling.