
PROFESSOR: In order to solve the Black-Scholes equation, which
is a pretty complicated differential equation,
what we're going to do is make some changes of variables
to turn Black-Scholes into a related equation that's
a lot easier to work with and easier to understand.
We'll take a look at some of its features,
and then we'll transform back and we'll
get our final answer in terms of the original Black-Scholes
variables.
So let's just preview some of the key results
and what our key approach is going to be,
how we're going to go about doing this.
So the first thing is what equation are we talking about?
The Black-Scholes PDE is closely related
to the diffusion equation, a well-known partial differential
equation, which is written in this way
as the partial of a function we'll call p0 with respect to t
is equal to 1/2 the second derivative.
So I have the first derivative on the left hand side.
I have second derivative on the right hand side,
and these both have the same sign.
If I put them on the same side of the equation,
there's going to be a minus sign relative to the two.
What's the solution to this equation?
Well, there are a lot of them.
But there's one that's very, very special.
That solution is a Gaussian, and that's one I've called p0.
So right now you should take a moment
to check that this expression satisfies this differential
equation.
You'd like to practice your partial derivatives,
there's no better time to do it right now.
You can see it's a little bit complicated
because this Gaussian where we've done Gaussians
before, it's easy to differentiate
with respect to z.
There's z squared up here.
But the t's appear in two different places.
They appear down here and they appear over here.
And the effect of t's appearing in
that way is that as t plays the role of sigma squared,
it's related to the width of the distribution.
As t gets larger, the Gaussian gets wider and wider.
And I've illustrated this here, that the peak gets lower,
the distribution gets larger.
One of the really interesting features
is that t approaches 0, the opposite happens.
The Gaussian gets steeper and steeper
and gets peaked near the origin.
So the first thing is simple differential equation.
Very interesting Gaussian, our old friend the Gaussian.
Special solution to that differential equation.
And we're going to use that special solution
to generate other solutions.
So the way in which we do that is going
to be a kernel type approach.
And I'll show you some examples in a moment
and you'll have a chance to do some yourself.
But the basic idea is that we find a function p.
It has a special form, and in this case, it's a Gaussian.
And if we want to find any particular solution that
has special boundary conditions, what we do
is we take our function p.
We're going to integrate it times something representing
the boundary conditions to get the thing that we want.
So in the case of stock options, what we're thinking about
is this expression here is going to be the replacement for p0.
This is going to be some complicated expression,
but it's going to be the moral and variable transformed
equivalent of p0.
This expression here is going to define
the payoff of the derivative at expiration.
Usually when we look at partial differential equations,
we think of initial conditions or of boundary conditions.
And if we have initial conditions,
we think about what happened subsequently.
In the case of financial derivatives
that have a definite expiration date, we work time backwards.
We know what they're worth in the future at expiration,
but we need to figure out what they're worth at times prior.
What this expression does is it lets
us convert from one to the other and look
at the structure of it, because we'll be seeing this again.
The integration variable is with respect
to this St over all possible future terminal
values of the stock price.
But this function here, p, depends not only
on St and big T on the values at termination.
It also depends on the current stock
price and the current time.
And because these are variables outside but they're
constants under the integral, this p function
is going to give us a bridge between the two,
between the terminal values and the present values.
And we're also going to see that the same equation,
the diffusion equation, describes
a bunch of other things, including
the evolution of probability distributions for random walks.
It helps us solve problems for the presence of barriers
for things like exotic options, knock in,
knock out options, and so on.
We'll get some good intuition about how those behave.