
PROFESSOR: Now, to get from Black-Scholes to the diffusion
equation, we make a few changes of variables,
which are not obvious at all.
And I'm going to show them to you,
and you're free to check them out
or you can take my word for them.
I'll explain where each of them comes from.
The first change of variables that we have
is to replace V by a present value factor in front
and to change the value.
That is, instead of writing things for the derivative,
we can express things in terms of its forward or future value.
So we know that there's discounting
should take place, at least for people who've taken 15415.
You know how that works, how we look at present value.
And one of the ways that we can simplify our equation
by combining terms is simply to put
in a discount factor in terms of the derivative itself.
And if we do that, we eliminate the one
term in the Black-Scholes equation
they didn't have any derivatives, the minus rV term,
and we can have this expression here in terms of U.
The next thing we can do is substitute for time
and for the stock price.
In terms of the stock price, what we're going to do
is we're going to introduce a logarithmic variable.
And we've already seen that in many ways rather than price,
the logarithm of price or the differences of logarithms
of price are much more natural variables.
Because what matters from an investment point of view,
from an informational point of view
is how stock prices change, not with the absolute levels are.
And the natural variable for capturing
those in a continuous time setting
is a logarithm of the price.
But this is just a change of variables.
So we'll call S. We'll replace it by E to the xi
or we'll let xi equal the logarithm of S.
And that will help simplify the equation.
The tip off that we might see that when
we look at the structure of our differential equation
is to notice the structure of these terms here.
Where this is an S d by dS and this
has an S squared with a second partial with respect to S
squared.
Because this has an S and a derivative with respect to S,
this is two S's and two derivatives, those behave
like logarithmic derivatives.
So the logarithmic derivatives simplify things,
and they'll transform this so that instead
of having this pre-factor S and this pre-factor S squared,
we won't have anything.
We'll just get an equation with constant coefficients.
The other change we'd like to make at the same time
is in our time variable.
And instead of measuring time forward,
we're going to measure time backwards
counting back from potentially an option expiration.
And the tip off for that is the relative sign
that we have between the time derivative
and the second derivative with respect
to the independent variable with respect to the underlying.
Now, notice that if I change S to minus S,
not only to negative prices not make sense financially,
but this equation, this part wouldn't change.
But there's a single time derivative here.
So changing the direction of time matters a lot.
Now, this actually works out fantastically well for us.
Normally for partial differential equations,
we look at how things evolve forward
and the relative sign that we would want
would be a minus sign.
Here there's a plus sign, which would
make it much more difficult to interpret and to solve.
But it turns out that the conditions we want
are the backward conditions.
We know the terminal values.
We want to find out what happens before.
So let's make this substitution.
We'll let tau equal t minus big T some fixed constant minus t.
Because this is a constant and we're making derivatives,
the big T isn't going to matter.
It's not going to show up.
And in fact, big T really will only
reappear when we impose boundary conditions on our equations.
So if we make those changes to variables,
we find that we get this expression.
We now have a derivative with respect
to a timelike variable, a relative minus sign,
a second derivative term with constant coefficients,
and then this piece over here with our interesting minus
sigma squared over 2 that we've seen
before times the first derivative piece.
And we can make that part go away as well.
So let's clean it up.
Finally, with one more change that
will absorb a single derivative term in our change of variable,
and let's introduce this variable x.
You'll notice that this logarithm, this log of S
plus this other piece in tau, if we were to exponentiate it,
if we were to exponentiate this whole expression,
you'll notice this should look familiar from the form
that we saw for the geometric Brownian motion.
And we looked at the integral of the stochastic differential
equation.
We had an expression just like that.
So it's not that the natural variable
is log S. Really the natural variable looks
like logarithm of S, E to the R tau minus sigma
squared tau over 2.
So either way, whether you like cleaning up the mathematics
or whether you're inspired by the form of the SDE
that we saw earlier, if we make that change a variable,
we're left with this expression now
which looks exactly like our diffusion equation
with a diffusion constant.
This is standard in literature sometimes
to have the constant sigma squared
that's here known as the diffusion constant.
We can make that go away as well by absorbing it into tau so
that the combination that always will appear would be sigma
squared tau.
And by redefining that, we could make it go away.
So there would be no extra coefficients at all.

We can check that this particular form
does satisfy that equation.
So let's take a look at this special solution.
This is like the p0 that I showed you before.
Again, it's an exercise in differentiation.
If you didn't do the earlier one,
you can follow along with this one.
So here's my definition of U. The only difference
is the sigma squared that shows up, and as I said,
always in this combination, sigma squared tau.
So we take one partial derivative
and we see it brings down a pre-factor with respect
to U, because it's exponential.
The second partial derivative with respect
to x, partial derivative with respect to tau,
and then we can equate these expressions.
So we see that the partial with respect to tau
is sigma squared over 2 times the second partial with respect
to x.
That's our diffusion equation.
