
PROFESSOR: So let's try a few examples
to check that this trick really looks like it should work.
And then we'll be all set to take a look both at
how and why it works, and how we can apply it to solving
the Black-Scholes equation.
Let's try a couple of examples.
If we take a look f of z equal to z squared,
then what our rule says is we should have p of zt
should be the integral of 1 over square root 2 pi t
e to the minus z minus z prime squared, z prime--
oops.
Let's leave it in red.
z prime squared dz prime.
And if we do that Gaussian integral we find the result.
This is equal to z squared plus t.
And let's check that.
Well, p of z at t equals 0 is z squared.
So that part works.
This part matches this part.
That's good.
Does it satisfy the differential equation?
What does the differential equation say?
The differential equation says that partial
of p with respect to t minus 1/2 second partial of p
with respect to z squared should be equal to 0.
Is it?
Well, partial of-- here's our expression.
The partial with respect to t is 1 minus 1/2 times
the second partial with respect to z.
First partial is 2z, the second partial is 2,
and it's equal to 0.
Shall we do another one?
Let's try f of z equals cosine of lambda
z, where lambda is a constant.
So then we do the integral.
We find the p of z, t by doing the Gaussian integral.
And you can do this by looking it up in a table book,
you can use Mathematica, or you can
break the cosine into complex exponentials
and complete the squared.
There are a variety of techniques for doing this.
When you do the integral, we find that this
is equal to-- let's see.
We have-- this is the integral of p0 of z minus z prime t.
That's our old friend, the Gaussian.
Times cosine of lambda z.
Of course, my integrals, unless specified otherwise,
go from minus infinity to infinity.
That's a z prime.
dz prime.
And this integral, when we do it,
is equal to e to the minus lambda squared t, or 2 times
cosine lambda z.

So let's take a look at this expression and see,
does it satisfy the differential equation?
Does it satisfy the initial conditions?
p of z, t as t goes to 0 equal to cosine lambda z.
So that checks.
And how about the derivatives?
Well, the partial of p with respect
to t minus 1/2 partial of p with respect to z squared.
Partial of this expression with respect to t
gives us from this exponential, e is here.
When we differentiate with respect to t,
we're going to get a minus lambda squared over 2,
going to get--

it's going to be minus lambda squared over 2 times
the function itself, times p of z, t, and minus 1/2
times the second partial with respect to z.
Well, the derivative, the first derivative
of that function with respect to z
is e to the minus lambda squared t/2 times lambda minus sine.
And the second one is going to bring down another lambda,
and the sine will turn into a cosine,
and we'll be left with minus 1/2 times minus lambda squared
times the function itself, p of z, t, all of which
is equal to 0.
So those are two instances that we've
checked so far in which doing our integral formula
generates something which is a completely reasonable function.
It has the desired properties that we
wanted when t is equal to 0, and it's
got some time dependence for t greater than 0 for what
goes on.
Finally, let's look at one more example
that's actually relevant for option pricing, that's
a closer example.
So let's take a look now at what happens if we have f of z
is equal to what we'll call the step function, theta z
minus kappa, where theta z is defined to be 1 for z
greater than zero and z for z less than zero.
It's a step function.
It goes long for 0, and then it goes up,
and then it's equal to 1.
So it's 0 for negative numbers, it's 1 for positive numbers.
That's what we'd like to have as t goes to 0.
And in this case then, that means
that our integration, our integrand,
is going to be our Gaussian times the function 1,
but the integral's going to be cut off.
So this says that p of z, t which
is going to be the integral, remember, of p0 of z minus z
prime t times f of z prime dz prime,
is going to be equal to 1 over square root of 2 pi
t times the integral of e the minus z minus z prime squared
over 2t times dz prime.
And what about our limits of integration?
Well, this is only going to be nonzero for,
and this is the part I wanted to have in yellow,
starting from kappa to infinity, not from minus infinity
to infinity.
So we can rewrite this in terms of a variable.
Let's define a new variable.
Let's let u equal z minus z prime over square root of t.

So du is going to be minus dz prime over square root of t.
Remember that inside the integral, z and t
are both constant.
So now I can write this integral as the integral is going to be
equal to 1 over square root of 2 pi, which is a constant,
from minus infinity to a value we'll call u*,
of e to the minus u squared over 2 du.
Now, this expression is the cumulative distribution
function, or the Gauss integral.
That is, instead of integrating from minus infinity
to infinity, where we get 1, we're
integrating from minus infinity up to some particular value.
And this function, this definite integral
which doesn't go to infinity, has a name.
And well call it, we'll give it a notation
that we'll be calling this phi.
So we will define this to be phi of u*.
And when we substitute back to our original variables,
we find that this is going to be equal to phi z minus kappa
over square root of t.
So phi is this incomplete integral.
It's the thing which when we differentiate it,
we get the probability density, because we
differentiate with respect to the upper limit
of the integral.
And in this case, what we get is an integral that's
cut off at the lower bound where we have the cutoff in our step
function, our initial function here.
Our function-- excuse me, forgot my pointer--
our initial function right here.
So our initial function says that we've
got theta is 1 where z in excess of kappa
and it's 0 below kappa.

So that's the solution when t equals 0,
and the solution for arbitrary times is given here.
Now, this one we need to be careful.
Because in the limit where t goes to 0,
we need to be quite careful about how this behaves.
Because the function is a smooth function,
but it's going to approach a step function.
So what happens is this function is going to behave
more or less like this--
if we can draw this.
Then we're going to go from minus 1 to 1
for the phi function.
But as t goes to 0, this function
is going to become steeper and steeper,
and eventually approach a step function, which
has a discontinuity that we put in at the beginning.
But for larger values of t, it's a completely reasonable
function and a very smooth function.
So we've done three examples of our basic rule
from our equation, which says that we
can use our special Gaussian solution to generate arbitrary
solutions.
And how are we going to apply that
for option pricing given the kernel that we have,
given this function p0?
And we'll find the correct version of it
for the Black-Scholes equation.
It says if you want a price not just a call option,
but a put option or a straddle or something
with some exotic pay-off, all you need to do
is take the same integrand, change
the function-- the payoff function-- do the integral,
and then you're done.
And this will generate all possible solutions
to the differential equation for the values
of option prices, derivative prices that
are consistent with these financial principles.
