
PAUL F. MENDE: This week's material
covers applications of linear algebra to asset pricing.
And they're really very close correspondences
between a lot basic notions of linear algebra
and those that are applied for the theory of asset pricing.
So I'd like to do something a little bit different this week.
What I'd like to do, is do a review of linear algebra,
and along the way, we'll comment on the different terminology
and show how it maps to material that was
covered in the basic lectures.
For people who need a refresher on linear algebra for this unit
and for upcoming things on optimization,
such as portfolio optimization, we have a lot of things
here from the basics.
But you won't learn all of linear algebra here;
this is really just to review.
There are a couple of references we've put out.
I recommend, a couple of books I recommend
and really anything you find online is probably great,
it's very standard subject, but it is
a prerequisite for the course.
However, if you want to brush up,
the book by Serge Lang, Introduction to Linear Algebra,
is very clear.
And the book by Sheldon Axler, Linear Algebra Done Right,
does set itself an ambitious goal.
You certainly don't need to read all of it,
but for the more mathematically minded,
you'll find it to be a very complete treatment.
But in particular, covers some things like dual spaces
that we discuss in the main lectures
that Lang doesn't cover.
So it's good on both those counts.
So we're going to cover this, but this subject
is a bit different.
And within the framework of this course,
it's going to be one unit.
Remember that this is a topics course.
These are methods that are used in different areas, not
necessarily as themselves.
But because you'll be seeing this in other courses,
in the Foundations of Finance, in Derivatives Pricing,
you'll see these ideas come up.
The idea of state prices, the idea of no arbitrage.
And often, they'll be in very specific contexts.
So what we've tried to do here, is give you
an algebraic foundation that is used
for more advanced treatments.
This is really just an introduction to that,
but it's so that you can think about what's
going on in a very general way.
At the same time, the problem sets
for this week are very simple.
They're not abstract at all.
They deal with numbers, small matrices you can do them
by hand, you can do them almost in your head,
you can put them on a computer.
So I don't think that we have a lot of detailed things,
like solving the diffusion equation
and Green's functions and binary value problems to worry about.
What I think we'll do instead, is take a look
at some of the basics.
And again, for the people who are
familiar with linear algebra, you'll
be able to make this identification along the way,
hopefully before I get there.
So let's get started.