
PROFESSOR: From this slide, we'll cover investments.
In this section, we refer to investments as debt securities
or equity securities for other business entities.
Why do companies make investments and purchase
securities?
Cash is often referred to as unproductive asset.
This is because cash by itself does not
generate high returns especially if interest rates are low.
Mature companies therefore will often
invest in this cash in equity or debt securities
rather than hold them at a surplus.
Because these securities are highly liquid
and have quoted market prices, GAAP
has stated that they be held on the balance sheet
at fair value.
Accounting for these investments depends
on many factors, including the investment
horizon, the ownership stake, and the nature of the security.
Is it debt?
Or is it equity?
This diagram shows how much investment classifications
are used.
First, the securities are divided through how much
ownership that company has.
For majority ownership, consolidate purchase method
is used.
This accounting method we have covered in the previous slides.
For minority investments, their classification
is further divided into passive and securities
with significant influence.
Reclassify investments as securities with significant
influence if the ownership stake is between 20% and 50%.
This method uses the equity method.
We'll also cover in this recitation.
Under passive investments, which are securities
that the firm holds under 20% ownership,
there are three methods to use--
trading, available for sale, and held-to-maturity.
Each classification is determined
by the firm's discretion.
Trading and available for sale securities
follow the fair value method for accounting.
And held-to-maturity securities follow the cost method.
We'll go over each method in this section.
As mentioned in the previous slide,
investments with more than 50% ownership
uses consolidation method.
Investments between 20% to 50% ownership,
we use the equity method.
For passive investments under 20% ownership,
we have trading securities, available for sale security,
and held-to-maturity securities.
How should we account for any changes in market
value of the investments?
First, held-to-maturity securities
do not have any effect for both balance sheet and income
statement.
Second, available for sale securities, changes
in the market value affects the balance sheet
but does not affect the income statement.
We will show this in a couple of slides how this can be done.
Finally, for trading securities, changes in the market value
affects both the balance sheet and income statement.
To reiterate, changes in market value
affect the balance sheet for available for sale and trading
securities.
Changes in market value affect the income statement only
for trading securities.