
BRIAN: Hello, everyone.
Welcome to the first recitation of financial accounting.
My name is Brian, and I'll be leading the recitations
in this course.
Recitations are meant to review lecture materials for better
understanding of the accounting concepts
and prepare students for the problem sets.
So what is the main goal of this class?
The main goal is to learn how to use relevant accounting
information to make better business decisions.
The goal is not to make you accountants
and to prepare financial statements from scratch.
Before we get into the main concepts,
I'd also like to share some tips for this course.
First, put some extra effort at the beginning
to understand key concepts.
Rather than blindly memorizing, understanding
why these concepts exist is critical.
Second, take advantage of your recitations,
and use your time wisely.
Third, homework and practice-- reviewing and practicing
problem sets and problems solved in the recitations
will get you a long way.
So in this first recitation, we'll
review the following concepts--
accrual accounting and financial statements,
recording transactions using the balance-sheet equation,
and practice some problems.
Let's first discuss financial statements.
What components are there in a set of financial statements?
First, there is a balance sheet.
This is a snapshot of the financial position
of a business.
If you went to Facebook and looked at their bank account
on December 31, 2013, how much cash would they have?
What were the value of their buildings?
Balance sheet provides information to these equations.
The second component is the income statement.
Income statement records accounting performance
of a company over a certain period of time-- a quarter
or a year, typically.
An example would be, what was Facebook's revenue
during the year 2013?
What was Facebook's expenses?
Was Facebook profitable?
Income statement can answer these questions.
The third component is the Statement of Cash Flows.
This records, over a period of time,
the sources and uses of cash.
Did Facebook generate enough cash
to cover its expenses during 2013,
would be an example of a question
that Statement of Cash Flows can answer.
The final component is the stockholders' equity,
or shareholders' equity.
This records the changes in shareholders' equity
in the company.
What is interesting about these four components
is that each component within the financial statement
is linked to each other.
Let's see how these are related.
As you can see in this chart, Balance sheet
is the parent statement, and all three other statements
flow to the balance sheet.
Statement of Cash Flows records the inflows and outflows
of cash and drives the final cash at the period end.
This final cash number flows to the cash item
in the balance sheet.
Income statement records revenues and expenses
and drives the bottom-line net-income number.
This net-income number flows to the statement of stockholders'
equity, and the statement of shareholders' equity
produces the final shareholders' equity number, which
then flows to the shareholders' equity item
in the balance sheet.
The important equations used in the financial statements
are called balance-sheet equations.
In this course, we're going to have four main equations that
are frequently used to derive important accounting numbers.
First, assets equals liabilities plus shareholders' equity.
As mentioned in the lecture, assets are what a firm owns,
liabilities are what a firm owes,
and shareholders' equity is the firm's net worth, or owners'
share of the business,
Second, net income equals revenues minus expenses
plus gains minus losses.
Revenues are something the firm earned by selling the firm's
product or services.
Expenses are something the firm spent to generate revenues.
Gains are financial inflows that are
generated not through the firm's ordinary business.
Losses, on the other hand, are outflows
that are not generated through the firm's ordinary business.
Third, ending cash equals beginning
cash plus net-cash flow.
And finally, ending retained earnings
equals the beginning retained earnings plus net income
minus the dividends.
We will study what these equations mean in a few slides.