
PROFESSOR: Another important basic concept of accounting
is the concept of accrual accounting.
Accrual accounting essentially records financial transactions
based on revenue recognition and matching principles.
For example, when a firm sells a product and the customer
pays with the credit card, cash is not exchanged,
but the firm still can incur the transaction as revenue.
On the contrary, cash accounting records transactions only
when cash is exchanged.
In cash accounting, the sales made
using a credit card will not be recorded as revenue
until the firm receives the sales amount in cash
from the credit card company.
In this class, we will focus on accrual accounting.
Let's solve an example.
Ted's apartment costs $1,000 each month to rent.
He decides he doesn't want to worry about forgetting
to pay his rent, and pays his landlord
$12,000 for the upcoming year.
Under cash accounting, how much expense would be incurred?
Ted paid $12,000 in cash already.
So the expense is $12,000.
Under accrual accounting, how much expense?
Accrual accounting recognizes expense only
when the service is provided.
In this case, the service is the time Ted actually
lived in the apartment.
And this question, assuming he lived in the apartment
for a month, Ted's expense is $1,000.
We will get to the revenue recognition concepts
in the next slide.
Which is more accurate?
I'll leave this up to you to think about.
To reiterate the exact definition of accrual
accounting, accrual counting attempts
to measure firm performance in a particular method
regardless of when cash is exchanged.
In accrual accounting, there are two main principles,
revenue recognition and matching principle for expenses.
Accrual is essentially the recognition
of revenues and expenses, regardless
of when cash is received.
The intuition behind revenue recognition
and matching principle is fairly simple.
To recognize revenues, earnings process
must be substantially complete, meaning,
the revenue should be earned in cash collections
should be reasonably assured.
For matching principle, you recognize
expenses in the same period as the associated revenue.
Let's discuss the concepts in a bit more detail.
Revenue recognition deals with the issue,
when do we exactly recognize revenue,
and when do we define when a sale is made in accounting.
The revenue recognition intuition
says that the revenue is recorded
when the earnings process is substantially complete.
Note that this definition makes no mention
of when the cash is collected.
Under accrual counting, we can record revenues and expenses,
even if no cash changes hands.
Matching principle deals with the issue
when to recognize expenses in a given period as
opposed to revenues.
The matching principle states that we
should match all expenses to their associated revenues.
In other words, whatever cost that's incurred
to create a revenue, will be recognized
once the revenue is realized.
Note that this definition requires
us to match all expenses associated with revenue,
both those that have occurred and those
that will occur in the future.
This requires estimating future expenses.
Why do we do this?
We do this to make financial statements more timely,
and to obtain better measures of profitability.
We now discuss each component of financial statements
more thoroughly.
First, the balance sheet, within the balance sheet
we find three classifications, assets, liabilities,
and equity.
Within each of these classifications,
we have separate accounts.
On the right, is a sample of balance sheet of a company XYZ.
Each line represents a line item,
or accounts of the balance sheet some items represented here
are cash, accounts receivable, inventory, prepaid expenses
and so on.
We will learn more about each item as the course progresses
I've mentioned the balance sheet equation briefly
a few slides ago.
What is the balance sheet equation or the BSE.
BSE is a method of recording individual transactions
or events.
BSE helps to identify the accounts that
are affected, whether the accounts increased or decreased
by a certain amount.
One important thing to remember is
that the equation must always balance at all times.
If the equation does not balance,
you probably made a mistake somewhere.
Let's go over some possible scenarios
how BSE can balance out.
Remember, assets equals liabilities,
plus shareholders' equity.
First, let's assume one item in the assets have increased.
To balance this out, one of three classifications
must be affected, assets, liabilities, or equity.
If some other item in the assets was affected,
that other asset item would have decreased
by the corresponding amount.
On the other hand, if assets increase and liabilities
or equity was affected, then liabilities or equity
would have increased.
With the same logic, if assets decrease by a certain amount,
there's some other item and assets would have increased,
or liabilities or equity would have
decreased by the same amount.