
We now examine the weak form of the Efficient Markets
Hypothesis.
Empirical tests of the weak form look
at various patterns in returns, patterns,
such as serial correlation in returns or performance
of filter rules or performance of technical analysis.
Let's begin with the serial correlation.
If past prices could be used to predict future returns,
we would be able to detect a correlation between price
changes and success of future returns.
In other words, we would be able to see
statistical correlation between past returns
and future returns.
This is known as serial correlation.
Would high degree of serial correlation
be inconsistent with the efficient markets hypothesis?
Or could it be explained by a risk model?
The challenge when trying to explain serial correlation
with the risk model is that one would
need to argue that the conditional risk of an asset
changes rapidly over time in relation to past returns.
Most common risk models do not have
that property, at least not at the high frequency,
such as daily.
In the following graph, we see an illustration.
We look at daily returns on two stocks.
One is Philips Electronics.
The other one is Sony.
These are both scatter plots.
On the horizontal axis, we plot daily returns on day T
and on the vertical axis daily returns
on the consecutive trading day, t plus 1.
Both of these scatter plots reveal no obvious pattern.
They look like a ball of points.
This is the point here.
There is no pattern of serial correlation
in the daily returns of these stocks.
As we estimate the serial correlation statistically,
we see that it is very close and indistinguishable from 0.
This type of pattern is typical.
For most individual stocks, serial correlation of returns
is very close to 0.
In a well-known study in 1965, Eugene Fama
analyzed patterns of serial correlation
across various stocks.
And he found that the horizons of 1, 4, 9,
16 days, evidence for serial correlation
is essentially absent.
On average, serial correlation among consecutive stock returns
is very close to 0 across stocks.
The same can be said about index returns, or portfolio returns.
The following graph illustrates lack of serial correlation
for the S&P 500 Index.
Looking at the 10-year daily sample,
we see that the relation between daily returns
on consecutive trading days reveals no obvious pattern
of serial correlation.
There are other statistical patterns that one can explore,
which are related to the weak form of market efficiency.
Two famous results are on momentum and reversal
in returns.
In a 1993 paper, Jegadeesh and Titman
documented presence of medium-horizon momentum
in asset returns.
What they did is they sorted stocks on their past returns
over, say, a 6-month interval and then
documented the average performance
over the following 6-month period.
They found that the past winners tend to outperform over
the following period.
The past losers tend to underperform.
This phenomenon is known as momentum.
Strong returns tend to continue, and weak returns
tend to continue at certain horizons of several months.
Hong, Lim, and Stein found that momentum
is particularly strong among small stocks with low analyst
coverage.
A different pattern, called long-term reversal,
was documented by De Bondt and Thaler in a 1985 paper.
They found evidence that losers over longer horizons,
let's say 36 months, subsequently
outperform over the horizon of 36 months.
It's the opposite for the winners.
Past winners tend to underperform over
a similar horizon.
The following graph shows some empirical evidence
for the historical performance of the past winners
versus past losers.
What we see is a clear difference
in the average returns.
The winner portfolio outperforming
the loser portfolio.
As we look at the historical performance of the momentum
and the reversal strategies, the question that arises
is, do these pose a challenge to the weak form
of efficient markets hypothesis?
Can we explain differences in performance
between winners and losers by differences in risk?
This is a subject of an ongoing debate.
For example, is it the case that the past winners are more
risky than the past losers?
Is it the case that the long-term losers
in the reversal strategy become more risky as a result?
When we compute abnormal returns,
we need to know what the normal returns are, returns
justified by the risk exposure.
Part of the challenge with the momentum strategy in particular
is that membership in the winner and loser portfolios changes
over time.
Past winners don't stay in the winner portfolio for long.
The same is true for the past losers.
This means that if we wanted to explain momentum
based on risk exposures, we would
have to argue that the risk of stocks
changes at relatively high frequency over time.
Momentum strategies are also fairly well known.
And they are commonly used by investment managers.
The fact that their profitability does not
tend to disappear over time suggests
that these returns may not be purely abnormal
and may indicate some kind of risk exposure.
And that is the reason why they don't get arbitraged away.