
PROFESSOR: The challenge in testing the semi-strong form
of market efficiency is that we can only
hope to find evidence against the hypothesis.
To do that, we would have to find a trading strategy using
public information that achieves abnormal returns.
We cannot examine all possible trading strategies of this
type.
Therefore, there is always this lingering doubt
that perhaps we simply didn't look
at the right types of trading strategies,
and that is why we haven't identified abnormal returns.
There is an alternative strategy for testing the hypothesis.
Instead of looking for particular trading strategies,
particular types of public information to predict returns,
we're going to look instead at asset management
and ask whether or not active asset managers are
able to achieve abnormal returns.
The idea here is simple.
Active asset managers use fundamental analysis.
They use public information to try and achieve
abnormal performance relative to their risk-adjusted,
risk-matched benchmarks.
We're going to look for abnormal performance of such managers.
And if they are able to beat their benchmarks
on a risk-adjusted basis, we're going
to conclude that there is evidence
that some types of public information
is useful for generating abnormal performance.
We wouldn't know exactly which signals
these managers are using.
But we are going to see that somehow they're
able to use public information to achieve abnormal returns.
If, on the other hand, active managers are not
able to outperform on a risk-adjusted basis,
we're going to conclude that all sorts of public information
that these managers may be looking at
are not useful for achieving abnormal performance.
This is the idea.
Instead of looking for signals based on public information
ourselves, we're going to examine performance
of the active asset managers and see
if they are able to use public information to achieve
abnormal investment performance.
We're going to look at the active equity funds
and compare their performance to equity indices.
This is a somewhat crude way of adjusting for risk
by comparing a return on the mutual fund
to the broad market return.
We find that on average mutual funds
tend to underperform the market about 60%, 70% of the time.
One may argue that perhaps the appropriate way of doing a risk
adjustment is not to simply subtract the market
return from the fund return, but to estimate the risk
exposure of the fund and to risk adjust each fund based
on their particular risk exposure, which may not
be equivalent to the risk in the index.
This type of refinement does not change the conclusion.
The majority of the funds does not deliver abnormal returns
on the risk-adjusted basis.
This type of risk adjustment also
includes adjustment for expenses, asset management
fees.
Any type of abnormal performance that the managers may
be able to achieve by using public information
is erased by expenses.
At the end of the day, the professional investment
management doesn't seem to generate value for investors.
And any type of value added they seem
to be able to produce using public information
accrues to the managers themselves
and not to the investors.
The following table summarizes historical performance
of all equity funds grouped along a number of dimensions.
We can see that when we look across all domestic equity
funds or when we group them by style, by size,
and so forth, the pattern is very similar.
The majority of the funds underperforms their benchmarks,
particularly over longer periods of time.
The advantage of this type of analysis
is that instead of comparing all of the funds
to the broad market, we are comparing them to the benchmark
that the funds themselves state as relevant
for their investment style.
The hope is that this kind of comparison
captures their risk exposure of the funds relative closely.
Another way of looking at the evidence
is to ask whether there is any way
to predict which funds may outperform their benchmarks
or the market going forward.
Perhaps on average, funds do not deliver abnormal performance.
But could it be that some of them are able to do so?
And if we simply focus on the best funds,
we will see evidence of abnormal investment performance using
public information?
It turns out that it is very difficult
to identify or predict which managers are going
to outperform going forward.
In the following table, you see one type of analysis
that provides evidence of the lack of predictability
in investment performance.
This is a very simple approach.
We sort funds on their past performance
into five quintiles from the 20% of the worst performers
to the 20% of the best performers
and then examine how these funds do going forward.
What we see is that past performance does not
predict which funds will end up as future winners,
specifically which funds will be in the top quintile
by investment performance.
The only pattern we see is that poorly performing funds,
the funds in the bottom quintile of past performance,
are likely to perform somewhat poorly going forward.
And they're also more likely to end up closed
or to merge with another fund.
Because these mutual funds cannot be shorted,
such pattern of predictable poor performance cannot be used
by investors to generate abnormal positive returns.
One may argue that the reason why we do not see a pattern
of predictability in returns, why we cannot identify
the winner funds, the best managers,
is because our method of analysis is relatively crude.
Perhaps sorting funds on their past performance
is not the best way to find the best managers,
and there is a more sophisticated approach
that could reveal funds with a relatively high
positive abnormal performance.
One idea for addressing this type of challenge
is to look at the professional pension fund managers.
Instead of looking for the winning mutual fund managers
ourselves, we're going to look at the performance
of the pension fund managers, who
try to identify the best mutual fund managers for managing
their assets.
Our discussion is based on the academic studies that
looked at the sample of pension fund managers
from 1994 to 2003 period and examined their hiring decisions
for mutual fund managers.
In the sample, we see over 8,000 hiring decisions
of 3,400 plan sponsors.
These are pension funds that allocate their capital
to professional money managers.
What we observe is that prior to the hiring decision,
performance of the fund managers is relatively good.
They outperform their benchmarks on the risk-adjusted basis
by several percentage points.
This is not surprising, because plan sponsors
use past performance of the fund as an input
into their decision.

What we see after the hiring process
is that going forward these managers
tend to outperform their benchmark by approximately
64 basis points.
This is on the value weighted basis.
This amount of outperformance is consistent
with the typical level of management fees
that these funds charge.
In other words, following the hiring decision,
these managers do not deliver abnormal performance
after fees.
Any kind of outperformance they seem to be able to generate
is then consumed by the fees that they
charge to the plan sponsor.
In conclusion, what we see is that it is not
easy to find trading signals based
on the public information that would allow
us to forecast future returns.
While academic literature contains some examples
of the signals that seem to forecast returns,
one has to be careful interpreting
this kind of evidence.
It seems that while it may be possible to find
such signals in historical analysis,
we do not see evidence of abnormal live performance
of the professional managers.
The challenge of going from their academic results
from the back tests looking for abnormal patterns in returns
to the actual investment strategies
is that when we implement trading strategies,
we have to deal with a variety of frictions
that eat into performance--
trading costs, market impact, constraints,
and so forth, as well as various statistical biases.
At the end of the day, any evidence
that we may find by analyzing historical data
doesn't seem to translate into actual investment
performance of professional active managers.