
PROFESSOR: We now looked at various types of information
related to the weak, semi-strong,
and the strong form of market efficiency.
The conclusion is that markets appear
to be fairly efficient in a weak sense.
It is difficult to achieve abnormal performance
using historical information on prices.
Markets also pretty close to being
semi-strong form efficient.
It is hard to achieve abnormal performance
based on public information.
But there is evidence that private, inside information
could be used to achieve abnormal performance.
Let's discuss a few questions related to these observations.
One central question is, how exactly does information
get into prices?
Our example of the Challenger crash gives us a clue.
Prices reflect information because various traders
act on the information that they have.
Markets don't happen to be efficient on their own.
They become efficient as a result of the trading activity,
as a result of various market participants
pursuing profitable trading opportunities.
By doing that, they help make prices efficient.
They impound the information into the prices.
Having said that, if prices end up
reflecting all available information,
who has the incentive to collect information in the first place
if information gathering is costly?
This creates a bit of a paradox.
In order for the markets to be informational efficient,
someone needs to collect information and trade on it.
Yet, if markets are as efficient as we say,
there is no incentive to collect information and curb the cost.
This suggests a relatively nuanced view
of market efficiency.
Markets don't happen to be perfectly efficient.
What we see is a process by which markets
are moving towards efficiency.
This process, however, relies on a constant information
gathering and trading by market participants.
They need to be incentivized to do that, which means that there
has to be some room for achieving profitable investment
performance by investing information, gathering,
and processing.
What has to be the case, however,
is that after accounting for the costs of gathering information,
there is no remaining room for abnormal performance
as a result of intense competition
between various traders.
In other words, one cannot expect to achieve abnormal
performance for free by looking at the easily available pieces
of information.
There may, however, be room for beating benchmarks,
beating indices on a risk adjusted basis
by the amount that reflects the amount of resources expended
on collecting and processing information.
A few practical issues about the efficient markets hypothesis
remain.
One is misidentification.
Perhaps the reason why we see some evidence
of abnormal performance is that we have missing risk factors.
Our risk adjustment is not perfect.
The possibility that some risk factors
are missing from our risk model is always present.
And this is something that we have
to keep in mind when we examine evidence on performance
of various trading strategies.
A related issue is time variation
in risk loadings and risk premia.
As we identify normal and abnormal returns,
we have to keep in mind that risk and risk
premium may be time varying.
And using risk models with constant risk premia
with constant risk loadings can lead
to misidentification of what we call
normal or risk-based returns.
There is a host of other issues that we can broadly describe
as market imperfections.
When we examine performance of trading strategies using
historical back tests, we have to worry
about frictions like transaction costs, liquidity, taxes,
price impact, and so forth.
In other words, when we look at the historical performance
of trading strategies on paper, we
have to keep in mind that these may not
translate one-to-one to the actual investment performance
in real market scenarios.
Finally, we want to address the issue of micro
versus macro efficiency.
Our argument for market efficiency
has to do with absence of arbitrage.
It has to do with the fact that in a competitive market,
investors pursue profitable trading opportunities,
and they eliminate mispricing as a result.
This argument works best at the micro level.
When we compare one stock to another with similar risk
exposures, or one derivative security to another
or to the underlying asset, we can expect arbitrage activity
to eliminate mispricing.
This argument is a lot harder to make
at the level of broad asset classes, at the macro level.
As a result, market efficiency as a concept
has most clear implications for the micro efficiency,
for the relative pricing of individual assets.
It is a lot harder to think about abnormal performance
at the level of broad asset classes,
like equities and bonds, real estate, and so forth.
The main lessons from the efficient market hypothesis
are the following.
We contrast market prices.
When we buy and sell financial assets at the market prices,
we achieve zero net present value.
Market prices are fair.
We neither make abnormal returns,
nor do we lose money when we trade at market prices.
This has important implications in corporate finance
in capital budgeting.
Market efficiency implies that market prices provide the best
estimate of the economic value of projects,
and that we should use the net present value, the market
value of the investment projects, as our guide
for investment decisions.
Firms should also expect to gain fair value for the securities
that they issue.
When they finance projects by issuing debt and equity,
they would expect investors to pay the fair price
because, on average, assets that trade in the financial market
are neither overvalued or undervalued.
Market efficiency also means that we can read into prices.
You could use financial prices to extract information
about fundamentals.
And this is something that can be
definitely useful for forecasting
and economic policy.
Another lesson from market efficiency
is that there are no financial illusions.
Market prices reflect fundamental information
properly.
This means that the market value of the firm,
the market the value of an asset, is based on its payoff.
It is not easy to trick the market, for instance,
by playing with accounting data.

The last conclusion, the last lesson from market efficiency,
is that one needs to have some kind of economic edge
in order to generate a positive NPV.
Otherwise, if you trade in the financial markets,
every transaction is a fair transaction.
It has zero net present value.
In order to create the project which
adds value, which has a positive net present value,
we need to either have superior information,
or superior technology, or access
to cheap resources, some kind of competitive advantage
or economic edge that translates into a positive net present
value.
We cannot simply add value by buying and selling financial
securities.