
PROFESSOR: We will now discuss a particular example
that illustrates the notion of market efficiency very well.
This is the Challenger crash.
It happened in January of 1986.
On the 28th of January at 11:39 AM,
the Space Shuttle Challenger exploded.
It was 73 seconds into its flight.
Immediately, news outlets reported the event.
Space Shuttle explodes, various contractors
who contributed to parts of the shuttle were asked to comment.
They had no immediate comment.
A presidential commission was formed
to investigate the causes of the crash.
Famously, Richard Feynman, a well-known physicist
of the day, was on the commission.
The commission eventually concluded several months later
that the cause of the crash was the infamous O-ring.
In the report published on June 9th of 1986,
the commission found that this rubbery piece of insulation
failed due to low temperatures, which
led to fuel leak and, ultimately, the explosion.
Let's take a look at the action in the financial markets
on the day of the crash.
We are now taking a close minute-by-minute look
at the price behavior.
What you see on the graph is a time series
of prices on several companies, which
were the important contractors contributing
elements of the shuttle.
In the first few minutes immediately
following the crash, all of these prices collapsed.
At that point, the market did not
know which of the contractors was responsible.
But it was clear that someone will be at fault
and the news was bad.
A couple hours later, we see divergence.
All of the prices except for one start recovering.
But one of the stocks does not recover by the end of the day.
This stock is the stock of Morton Thiokol, which
was the producer of the O-ring.
How did the market know, almost immediately,
who was at fault when it took several months
for the presidential commission to figure it out?
The answer is that some of the engineers at Morton Thiokol
knew that there was a potential problem with their O-ring.
They tried to warn NASA about the danger,
but they were ignored, or overruled.
The lesson here is that information that is available
to just a few can get impacted into prices relatively quickly.
This is how markets reach efficiency.
They're very good at aggregating useful pieces of information.