
PROFESSOR: We now examine the strong form
of market efficiency.
This is the most extreme form of the hypothesis.
And it states that no information
can be used to achieve abnormal investment performance, not
even private information.
Most academics and practitioners believe
that this strong form of market hypothesis
does not hold in the data.
Markets are not strong-form efficient.
Private information could be used
to achieve abnormal returns.
We're going to look at some academic studies that
examine performance of insiders and find
evidence of superior returns based on private information.
We should know that in most developed countries,
trading on insider information is illegal.
In the US, legislation from 1934,
the Act of the US Securities and Exchange Commission,
rules against insider trading.
Trading by firm insiders based on private or privileged
information is prohibited.
There are also constraints on the investment banks
that separate investment banking from sales
and trading and research for the same purpose.
It is well understood that trading
on private or inside information is toxic to the market.
It erodes market liquidity.
And therefore, various legal safeguards
are put in place to limit this type of activity.
We do not rely on the markets to fully reflect
inside information in prices.
The following table, based on a 1992 study
in the Journal of Finance, examines
performance of insider traders.
The data here comes from the criminal cases
where insider trading has been documented.
And therefore, we know exactly when
insiders were trading on privileged information, what
types of announcements they were using,
and what kind of performance they were able to achieve.
The most common example is trading
on the takeover-related information.
What we see is that abnormal performance of insiders
is highly economically significant and statistically
significant.
Average cumulative of normal return
following a takeover-related news is close to 30%.
This is also confirmed what most academics and practitioners
believe, that trading on inside information can be profitable
and that markets are not strong-form efficient.
This is the reason why insider trading is heavily regulated,
and various legal restrictions are
placed trying to prevent this type of activity
in financial markets.
Another way of looking at insider trading,
rather than examining individual cases,
is to look at the average price behavior
around the announcements.
The following study from 1981 looks
at the price behavior and trading
volume around the takeover announcements.
What we see here is intriguing.
Following the announcement, on average,
there is no price drift up or down,
which would seem to be consistent with the semi-strong
form of market efficiency.
What is puzzling here is that prior to the announcement,
there seems to be a clear pattern in the price behavior.
The price of the target stock tends
to rise in the days preceding the news.
It is difficult to explain this kind of pattern
other than by appealing to the fact
that some of the traders with privileged information
are trading before the news, and their trades
are getting impacted into prices.
And they're moving the price of the target firm.
On average, roughly half of the price increase
that occurs as a result of a takeover announcement
happens in the days preceding the announcement, which
is strong evidence for some kind of insider trading ahead
of the announcement.
We might not know who exactly is trading ahead
of the announcement.
These are not the firm insiders who
would have to file a note with the SEC following their trades,
revealing their trading activity.
But it does appear that some third parties
with the sensitive information about the takeover
are trading ahead of the announcement.