
PROFESSOR: We now consider the semi-strong form
of market efficiency.
Under the semi-strong form of efficiency,
all public information should be fully reflected in prices,
and it should be impossible to achieve
abnormal risk adjusted returns by trading
on public information.
This implies in particular that fundamental analysis should not
be useful for achieving abnormal investment performance.
Now, the purpose of fundamental analysis
is to exploit opportunities when some public information
about firms is not reflected in prices immediately.
If markets are semi-strong-form efficient,
fundamental analysis is not going to achieve that goal.
Information included under the semi-strong form of market
efficiency is going to contain things like firm
financial statements, any types of corporate announcements,
such as news about earnings, dividends, share repurchases,
debt issue, stock splits, and so forth,
as well as mergers, acquisitions, and takeovers.
None of these types of announcements,
none of these sources of public information,
should be useful for generating abnormal investment
performance.
Let's examine how prices should respond to information
under the semi-strong form of market efficiency.
When the news arrives, there are three possible patterns.
The price may react to the news immediately
with no further adjustment.
This is the blue line on the graph.
We may see delayed reaction, which is the dotted line, so
that information gets priced in eventually,
but not immediately.
Or we may see overreaction, where the price moves
too much in response to an information release,
and then it recovers back to the appropriate level.
Under the semi-strong form of market efficiency,
price action to news should be immediate.
And we should not see any underreaction or overreaction.
There should be no predictability in returns
following the announcement.
In other words, the blue line in the graph
represents the average pattern of price response to the news.
As we examine empirical evidence,
we are going to look for evidence in favor
or against this type of price response to information.
An important tool used to analyze
semi-strong form of market efficiency is event studies.
The objective of event studies is
to examine if for specific information is incorporated
into the price in a single jump once information is released.
Let's discuss the design of the event
studies, which is a commonly used statistical setting.
And it's applied broadly, not just
for the purposes of analyzing market efficiency.
The idea is to pull together various observations
and to connect them in time, so that day zero
corresponds to the date at which information is released.
The actual events, of course, are
going to occur to various firms at different points
in physical time.
We then calculate daily returns during a window,
let's say a 30-days window, around the announcement date,
around day zero.
We'll look 30 days prior to the announcement and 30 days
following the announcement.
We then define the comparison group.
For example, we could look at the market portfolio
or the industry portfolio or a portfolio of similar firms
as a comparison group.
And we compute returns on the comparison group
on the same days.
We denote the return on the market
or a different kind of comparison group
as Rm sub t for each day t.
Next, we define the abnormal return.
The abnormal return is the difference
between the return on the stock on day t
and the return on its comparison group,
which is supposed to have the same risk profile.
The abnormal return AR on stock i at day t
is the difference R sub it minus Rmt.
In other words, it's the return of the stock
minus the benchmark or the comparison group return.
Once we define the abnormal daily returns on the stock,
we calculate the average abnormal return
over all of the events.
This is defined for each day in our window, 30 days prior
to the announcement to 30 days following the announcement.
Finally, we define the cumulative abnormal return,
starting from 30 days prior to the announcement and all
the way to the end of the window, 30 days afterwards.
And the cumulative abnormal return
is computed by simply adding up abnormal returns
on consecutive days.
This cumulative abnormal return is our object of analysis.
Under the semi-strong form of market efficiency,
we should not see on average a positive cumulative abnormal
return.

If you look at the following graph,
we see, again, an illustration of how
the cumulative average abnormal return should
look under the efficient reaction
to information, on the underreaction and overreaction.
Following the efficient reaction to information,
we should see an immediate jump on announcement, on day zero,
with no clear pattern up or down following the announcement.
If on the other hand, the market underreacts to information,
we should see that the immediate response is relatively muted,
and there is a pattern of predictability
with the upward drift in prices following the announcement.
If the market overreacts, we are going
to see a very large immediate response
and then mean reversion afterwards.
It is clear that under the efficient reaction
to information, we will not be able to generate
abnormal profits by trading on public information
after the announcement.
If the market under or over reacts to information,
then such strategies will be possible.
If the market underreacts, buying
following the announcement should
lead to abnormal profits.
If the market overreacts, we want
to sell following the announcement.
And that, again, would lead to abnormal profits.