
PROFESSOR: This week, we talk about market efficiency.
Market efficiency is a very important topic,
which is somewhat subtle.
Part of the challenge is that the notion of efficiency
is broadly used, and it has different meanings
in different contexts.
In our discussion, in finance, efficiency
has a very particular, precise meaning,
which we are going to clarify.
The general notion of economic efficiency
has to do with the allocation of limited resources.
Are resources used in the most productive manner possible?
It is certainly an important question.
And a well-functioning financial system
plays a critical role in the allocation of resources.
This is not, however, how we think about efficiency
in financial markets.
Financial market efficiency is about how well market prices
aggregate information.
In an efficient market, prices fully
reflect all available information.
What we're going to do is clarify
what exactly it means for prices to fully reflect information.
We will also look at empirical evidence in favor
or against the efficient markets hypothesis.
Why would we expect markets to be efficient?
The answer is, ultimately, because of arbitrage.
Financial markets are fiercely competitive.
Traders, by chasing profitable trading opportunities,
incorporate all useful information into prices.
As a result, prices fully reflect
all the relevant available information.
A common criticism that you would hear
is that, how can markets be efficient
when investors are human and humans make mistakes?
That is certainly true.
However, this criticism is misplaced.
Market efficiency does not require
most of the traders or investors to be
rational and well-informed.
What we need is just a few smart, well-financed agents
who are unconstrained, and they are
the ones who can spot and eliminate profitable trading
opportunities.
They eliminate inefficiencies.
In other words, market efficiency
is a theory of sharks who capture profitable trading
opportunities.
It is not a theory of how an average investor behaves.