
PROFESSOR: We now need to introduce a testable definition
of what it means for prices to fully reflect
all available information.
According to our definition, a market
is efficient if it is impossible to make
excess profits by trading on all available information.
Formally what that means is that the expected value
of the price plus the dividend next period
conditional on all available information,
which we denote by the information set J sub t,
is equal to the current price times the conditional expected
return on the asset.
The exact form of market efficiency
depends on what exactly we include into the information
set.
What do we mean by all available information?
This is captured by J.
There are three important cases of market efficiency,
three forms.
The weak form specifies that all available information
means all of the information included in the past history
of security prices.
For example, if the market is weak-form efficient,
it means that technical analysis,
which looks at the past history of prices,
cannot be used to achieve excess returns.
The next level of market efficiency
is what is called the semi-strong-form efficiency.
Under this notion, security prices
reflect all publicly available information.
This is not just information on prices,
but also information from other public sources.
Under the semi-strong form of market efficiency,
fundamental analysis that looks at various kinds
of fundamental data does not allow one
to achieve excess returns.

Finally, we get to the strong form of market efficiency.
As the name suggests, this is the strongest notion.
And according to the strong form,
all information is reflected in prices,
both public and private.
Under this hypothesis, inside information
available to the firm insiders does not
allow them to achieve superior performance or excess returns.

When we test the efficient market hypothesis empirically,
it is critical to differentiate excess or abnormal profits
from the risk premium.
This means that to make the efficient market hypothesis
usable, we need to take a stand on a particular risk model.
We need to identify what is the risk premium justified
by the risk exposures of the assets
and what part of their excess returns
is abnormal, which would be a violation
of the efficient markets hypothesis.
There are two common approaches of dealing with this challenge.
We could use a common set of risk models
to perform a risk adjustment and to identify
what part of returns is abnormal on a risk-adjusted basis.
The difficulty is that we do not have a well-accepted common set
of risk models.
And therefore, there is always a lingering doubt
that what we are seeing is not an abnormal performance,
but rather a failure to find the right risk model.
The second approach would be to find a profitable trading
strategy that would be very difficult to justify
by any risk model.
And we are going to look at some of the examples
of such strategies.
Obviously, testing the efficient market hypothesis
looks at the composite hypothesis,
the markets are efficient, and that our risk adjustment
is correct.
We're going to keep this in mind when
we examine empirical evidence.