
PROFESSOR: Let's examine some empirical evidence
using the events study tool.
We're going to look at a couple of different types
of corporate announcements.
One is the takeover announcement.
When the firm becomes a target of takeover,
it receives a takeover offer, which is typically
at a significant premium to the current price of the firm.
Following the takeover announcement,
the price of the target firm jumps, but not all the way
to the offer price.
This does not necessarily create a profitable trading
opportunity.
The reason for that is that following
the news of the takeover offer, there
is still significant uncertainty about
whether or not the takeover is going to go through.
The question we want to address is
whether it is possible to generate abnormal trading
profits by buying the stock of the target firm following
the takeover news.
As we see in the following graph, when
we look at all of the firms following
the announcement of the takeover offer,
there is no obvious pattern in the stock price behavior
following the announcement.
The stock price jumps on the news
and remains flat on average over a 60-day period following
the announcement.
If we then look at all of the firms for which the takeover
eventually materializes, their price
tends to move higher over the 60-day window.
Of course, we cannot monetize this type of pattern,
because we don't know in advance which of the firms are going
to eventually complete the takeover.
If we look at the firms for which takeover does not
go through, the price of these firms
reverts to the pre-offer level.
Again, this is looking at the data
with the benefit of hindsight.
We don't know at day zero, which of the firms
are going to end up on the blue or the yellow lines.
What we see instead is the average pattern
across all of the firms.
And when we look across all of the firms,
there is no predictable price reaction
following the announcement.
In other words, markets seem to respond
to the information about a takeover offer
in an efficient manner, as predicted
by the efficient markets hypothesis.
The response is immediate.
And there is no subsequent price drift.
Another type of news that we examine using a similar design
is the announcement of dividend omissions.
Typically, when the firm decides to omit a dividend,
that is perceived by the market as a piece of bad news.
Firms are highly reluctant to cut or omit dividends.
And they only do this when their business circumstances require
so.
In other words, the news of a dividend omission
is a bad news about the future prospects of the firm.
And in particular, it's a negative signal
about future cash flows.
What we see empirically is that the price
tends to drop on the announcement of the dividend
omission, which reflects the fact that this
is a piece of negative news about the future cash
flows of the firm.
And there is no clear pattern of price drift up or down
following the announcement.
Again, what we see is that price behavior around dividend
omissions is consistent with the semi-strong form of market
efficiency.
Price response to the announcement immediately,
and there is no room for achieving abnormal trading
profits by trading following the announcement.
Next, we'll look at the pattern, which
is known as the post-earnings announcement drift.
Our discussion is based on the paper by Bernard and Thomas
from 1989 that looked at the price behavior following
earnings announcements.
This pattern poses a bit of a challenge
to the semi-strong form of market efficiency.
If we sold stocks into portfolios
based on the magnitude of the surprise in their earnings
announcements-- in other words, if we
look at earnings announcements in relation
to analyst expectations, we find that the stocks for which
earnings announcements deliver the largest positive surprise
relative to expectations tend to jump on announcement,
which is what we would expect.
But then what is puzzling is that they
continue rising in value following the announcement.
If we look at the other side, if we
look at the stocks with the negative surprise,
we see the reverse pattern.
They fall in value on announcement
and then continue declining afterwards.
This pattern is puzzling.
And it is similar to the momentum pattern.
Companies that perform well during a recent window
continue performing abnormally well going forward.
And firms that perform relatively poorly,
looking back, continue underperforming going forward.
To explain this pattern using a risk-based model,
we would need to argue that the firms that
deliver a positive earnings surprise
have a relatively high level of risk going forward.
And this is what explains their relatively high performance.
The firms that have a negative earnings surprise
would need to have a relatively low level of risk, which
would explain why the average returns going forward
are relatively low.
It is fairly challenging to come up
with a plausible risk-based explanation
for the post-earnings announcement drift.
It is fair to say that there is no consensus on whether or not
this pattern is an anomaly or evidence of time varying risk
exposures of the firms.