
PROFESSOR: We have now developed a general method
to value an asset.
If we are given its expected cash
flow and the right discount rate,
its value is simply given by the present value
of its expected cash flow, a simple calculation.
When using this method in different applications,
we need to come up with estimates
of an asset's expected cash flow and the corresponding discount
rates.
As we dive into these applications,
we will further develop the tools and techniques
needed to come up with these estimates.
For now, I would only like to mention
several general considerations to keep
in mind in actual valuation applications.
The first is taxes.
It is important to keep in mind that cash flows generated
by assets are often subject to taxes.
For example, financial assets, such as bonds and stocks,
pay in the form of interest, dividends, and capital gains.
Investors may have to pay taxes on these payments.
Firms earn profits, but they also have to pay taxes.
What then matters when it comes to valuing an asset
will be its cash flows after taxes.
Thus, in the present value calculation,
we have to use after tax cash flows.
We will see more of this point in later applications,
especially in project valuations.
The second factor to keep in mind is currency.
All examples so far, and throughout this course,
will consider cash flows denominated in US dollars.
This is only for convenience.
In practice, of course, cash flows
can come in other currencies.
Our method is perfectly applicable.
We only need to switch to cash flows and discount
rates denominated in these currencies.
The third factor to keep in mind is how to forecast cash flows.
When valuing an asset, we first need
to come up with estimates or forecasts of its future cash
flows--
magnitude, timing and risk.
Sometimes these forecasts are given
to us, such as the cash flow of a government bond, which
includes interests and the principal payment.
Often we need to come up with our own forecasts,
such as dividends from a stock or profits from a project.
We will do so when we get into these applications.
Given an asset's cash flow, size, timing and risk,
we need to find the right discount rates from the market.
How to do this operationally requires further development
and enrichment of our valuation methodology,
which we will spend more time on over this course.
For now, we only need to keep in mind a few points.
For cash flow, the discount rate will depend on its timing.
That is, if it's in one year, in two years, or five years.
In case the cash flow is risk-free,
we can use the risk-free interest rate
which reflects the time value of money as determined
in the financial market.
However, it is important to know that one year interest rate is
in general different from two year and five year interest
rates.
In general, cash flows are risky.
In this case, we need to include the proper risk adjustment
in the discount rate--
namely, the risk premium associated
with the risk of the cash flow.
It is also important to keep in mind
that the risk for net asset's one year cash flow
can be quite different from the risk in its two year cash flow.
Consequently, the risk premium for each of these cash flows
are, in general, different.
Putting the pieces together, we have
the following present value formula,
where present value is the sum of the present values
of each piece of the asset's cash flow.
That is, the expected cash flow at each time, t,
discounted at rt, the appropriate discount rate
for that cash flow C FT.
Despite the fact that the discount rate for each cash
flow of an asset is in general different,
in most of our examples, we will use the same discount
rate for an asset's cash flow at different points in time.
It is important to keep in mind that this is mostly
for simplicity.