
PROFESSOR: In previous examples, we effectively assume
that cash flows and discount rates are over the same period.
For convenience in the exposition,
we often set the period to be one year.
But in practice, this may not be the case.
For example, cash flows may occur
more frequently than annually.
And rates of return may be quoted or realized
more frequently than annually.
Under these circumstances, we need to treat the time period
in a consistent manner.
In particular, interest or rate of return,
may be credited or charged more often than annually.
For example, for bank accounts and credit cards,
interest is charged daily.
For loans and leases, the interest
is often computed on a monthly basis.
For bonds the interest is paid semi-annually.

For the same quoted interest rate,
the effective annual rate may differ,
depending on how frequent interests are received or paid.
In the market interest rates are typically
quoted in the form of annual percentage rate, or APR,
with k periods of compounding within a year.
What this means is that the actual interest paid per period
is APR divided by k, the number of compounding periods,
and then compounded over the whole year.
In this case, the actual annual rate
could be quite different from APR,
depending on the number of compounding periods.
In order to see the effect of compounding,
let's consider the following example.
Suppose that the bank quotes us in interest of 10% APR.
Depending on how the interest is compounded,
we'll arrive at quite different outcomes.
Let's suppose that we deposit $1,000.
If the compounding is annual, then
what we're going to be getting will be an interest
of 10% on the principle.
That is $100 at the end of the year, and that would be $1,100.
And that's given by the second column in the table.
But what if the compound is semiannual?
In that case, the interest would be
half of the 10% APR paid over every 6 months.
The outcome is given by the third column.
We start with a balance of $1,000.
In 6 months that turned into $1,050.
That's $1,000 plus 5% of 6 months' interest.
And therefore the next 6 months, we're
going to be getting another 5% of interest
on the starting balance of $1,050.
So by the end of the year, we'll be getting $1,103.
Clearly, that's different from the previous case
when the 10% APR is compounded annually.
The fourth column gives the situation
when the 10% APR is compounded quarterly.
Here for every quarter, we're getting 2 and 1/2%
of the interest.
But that accumulates over three quarters.
The last column gives the outcome
if the interest is compounded monthly.
And by the end of the year, the $1,000
of principal at the beginning of year would turn into $1,105.
As we can see, as the compounding periods increase,
we're actually going to be gaining more outcome.
And the reason is that when interests
are paid more frequently, we're earning interest
on the interest payments paid previously.
Let's now look at another example
in slightly more detail.
Suppose that actually Bank of America
offers one-year certificates of deposits
at an APR of 5% with semi-annual compounding.
If you invest $10,000, how much money
do you have at the end of one year?
What is the actual interest rate that you earn?

Well first, we already know the quoted APR of 5%
is not the actual annual rate, because the compounding is not
annual.
It's only used to compute the 6-month interest rate, which
will be half of the 5%.
That's 2 and 1/2%.
If we invest $10,000 at the beginning of a year,
then by the year end what we would have
would be $10,000 times 1 plus 2 and 1/2%.
That's for 6 months' interest, then times 1 plus 2 and 1/2%
again for the second 6-month period.
In total, the end balance would be $10,506.25.
In the second 6-month period you earn interest
on the interest paid for the first 6 months.
So the actual annual rate, which is also
called the effective annual rate, or EAR,
is given by this last equation on a slide.
The effective annual rate equals to 1 plus 2 and 1/2%
compounded twice, because we have two compounding periods
within a year, then minus 1.
That gives 5.0625%.
That is the actual annual interest
rate we're earning on this CD.
More generally, we can compute the effective annual rate
from the APR plus the number of compounding periods.
Let our APR be the APR, and k the number of compounding
intervals per year.
Then in one year, $1 invested today
would yield 1 plus the APR divided by k.
That's the actual interest rate paid for each period.
And then compound it k times.
The effective annual rate is then
given by the following equation, namely 1
plus the effective annual rate should
equal to 1 plus the interest per compounding period,
then compound it 10 times.
And this gives us the equation on the bottom right
of the slide.
The effective annual rate is basically the gross return
over the year, minus 1.
We can further see the relationship
between the effective annual rate
and the number of compounding periods,
holding constant the APR.
Suppose that the APR is 5%.
Then the effective annual rate we're
going to be getting as described in the table below,
depends on the number of compounding periods.
If k is 1, then that means that the compounding
is on an annual basis.
Then the effective annual rate is just 5%, same as the APR.
If k equals 2, that is if the compounding is semi-annual,
then the effective annual rate will be 5.0625%.
That's higher than the 5% we are getting
if the compounding is annual.
If compounding is on a monthly basis, namely k equals 12,
then we get the third row, the effective annual rate
will be 5.1162%.
What if k equals 365?
That means that the compounding is on a daily basis.
Then the effective annual rate will be 5.1267%.
How about on an hourly basis?
That is when k equals 8,760.
Nobody really does that, but here
is just as an illustration.
Then the effective annual rate will be 5.1271.
What if the compounding is continuous?
Then what we're getting as the effective annual rate will
be 5.1271.
And that's fairly close to the hourly compounding result.
Of course nobody really does continuous compounding.
But as we'll see later on, for mathematical convenience,
sometimes we assume the compounding
is continues to arrive at some simple results.