
PROFESSOR: Before we finish our discussion on special cash
flows in compounding, we would like
to look at one more example, mortgage calculation.
Here, we are going to be looking at a fixed rate mortgage that's
typical in the United States.
It often requires a 20% down payment
and borrow the rest from a bank using the property
as collateral.
Over time of the mortgage, the borrower
would pay a fixed monthly payment
and, typically, the borrower also has the option to prepay.
Namely, during the time of the mortgage if the interest
rate moves in the desirable direction,
the borrower can actually borrow more money
from the market at a lower rate and then repay
the previous mortgage.

Now let's consider a specific example.
Suppose that you're buying a house for $500,000, half
a million dollars, with 20% down payment, that is $100,000.
And then finance the remaining part
which is $400,000 using a 30 year fixed rate mortgage.
Let's assume that the mortgage rate
is 8.5% APR compounded monthly because the mortgage
payments are typically on a monthly basis.
The question we would like to answer
is, what would be the monthly payment for this mortgage?

Well, the monthly payment for this mortgage
is really like annuity with 360 payments,
monthly payments, at some level, let's say, M. Now for this deal
to be fair, the present value of all these monthly mortgage
payments should equal to the amount of money
we are borrowing, namely $400,000.
So if you write down this equation,
on the left-hand side is the amount we are borrowing,
on the right-hand side is the present value
of all the future mortgage payments we have to pay,
total 360 of them on a monthly basis.
If the monthly payment is M, we can look at each one of them,
discount them back using the mortgage interest rate.
Keep in mind that the mortgage interest rate 8.5
is an APR with monthly compounding.
So the actual monthly interest is 8.5% divide by 12.
So if we use the present value formula
for annuity, what we're going to be getting
will be the right-hand side of the second equation.
What's unknown here is the monthly payment M.
If we solve for that, we're going
to be adding arriving at the following result.
The monthly payment would be $3,075.65.
What is that effective annual interest rate
we're paying on this mortgage?
That is not 8.5%, the APR, because that APR is
compounded on a monthly basis.
Using our EAR formula, we can easily
compute the effective annual rate
for this mortgage, which is given
by the last equation on the slide, that
is 8.839% rather than 8.5%.
So this computation is really what's behind mortgage loans.
What we have shown is that for a mortgage
of $400,000 at a mortgage rate of 8.5%
APR with monthly compounding, the actual monthly payment
is $3,075.65.
And that's shown in the second column
of the table on the slide.
And of course, given that this is a 30-year mortgage payment,
the monthly payments will continue
for 30 years with a total of 360 monthly payments.
What we can also show is that the monthly payment
of $3,075.65 consists of two pieces.
One part is the interest on the remaining principal,
the other part is the amount that we're
paying down the principal.
So the interest payments, over the life span of the mortgage,
is given by the third column in a table shown in red.
So for the first month, the interest payment is $2,833.33.
That's, that is a bigger chunk of the monthly payment.
Only $242.37 is used from the monthly payment
to pay down the principal.
After the first month of mortgage payment,
the remaining principal is given by the last column.
The first row gives us $399,757.68.
Then for the second month, the interest payment
would be 8.5% divide by 12, that's
the monthly interest times, the remaining principal that's
$399,757.68.
That will give us the second row in the third column.
That's the interest payment of $2,831.62.
The difference between that and the monthly payment,
which is $244.04, that's the second row
in the fourth column, that is the amount
from the second monthly payment that goes into paying down
the principal.
And after the second monthly mortgage payment,
the remaining principal is given by the second row
of the last column, $399,513.64.
And we can keep going through this calculation
all the way to the last month of the mortgage.
So for the last month's mortgage,
which is given by the last row in the table,
the total monthly payment is still $3,075.65.
Out of that only $21.63 is paying the interest
on the remaining principal.
$3,054.02 goes to paying down the remaining principal.
Of course, by that time, the remaining principal
will be paid down to zero and the mortgage is completed.
We can also show this through this graph.
What's shown here is the percentage
of the monthly mortgage payment, namely $3,075 or so.
What percentage goes to the interest payment
and what percentage goes into paying down the principal?
The red gives us the fraction of the mortgage payment
that's paying the interest.
And the blue shows the percentage
of the monthly mortgage payment that's used
to paying down the principal
Over the lifespan of the mortgage,
as we can see the fraction of interest payment
actually at the beginning, takes most part
of the monthly payment, but over time, actually
decreases, eventually hits zero.
For the percentage of monthly payment
paying down the principal, it's just the opposite.
At the beginning, only a small fraction of the monthly payment
goes into paying down the principal.
But over time, it increases.
By the end of the mortgage lifespan, it's almost 100%
of the monthly payment.