PROFESSOR: We now apply the present value valuation method
to a few simple cash flows.
We do so for several reasons.
First, to practice the new method we have just developed.
Second, the simple cash flows we will consider are quite common
in the market as well as in our daily life.
Third, these simple cash flows will also
be used to model the cash flows of various assets
as a first pass.
In particular, we'll consider four special cash flows--
annuity, annuity with constant growth,
perpetuity, and perpetuity with constant growth.

Annuity refers to a constant cash flow,
say, a repeated for t periods starting from period one.
And this cash flow is also shown by this cash flow chart.
We're seeing a time zero for the next t periods,
we're going to be getting a constant cash flow a.
How do we value a cash flow like this?
Assuming that we know that discount rate is r.
What we would like to compute is its present value
which will be the first cash flow a discounted back once
at 1 plus r plus the second cash flow, which
is also a discounted at the discount rate r
twice, and so on.
Now, in order to compute this, we
could either compute each of the terms, the present value
of each piece of the cash flow at the month,
or we could actually try to find a simple formula.
In order to do so, let's do the following.
Take the first line, the present value formula.
Multiply both sides by 1 plus r.
That gives us the second equation,
and then we take the difference between these two equations,
namely subtracting the first equation
from the second equation.
That gives us the third equation,
namely r times PV the present value of this annuity
is given by the two terms on the right-hand side, a minus a
divided by 1 plus r to the t-th power.
We can rearrange the terms and arriving
at the following formula, namely the present value of annuity
is just going to be given by a, the level of the cash
flow, times 1 over r times what's in the square bracket.
Of course, we can also compute the future value of annuity
which is given by simply the present value of annuity
times 1 plus r to the t-th power.
That's the equation at the bottom of the slide.
Let's consider an example.
Suppose an insurance company is selling
an annuity, a standard product from insurance companies,
that pays $10,000 per year for 20 years.
Suppose that the right discount rate is 5%.
The question is what should be the company
sell this product for?
Well, with the present value formula,
we can easily finish this computation.
The price for this annuity should be its present value,
and that's given by this formula.
The level of the annuity is $10,000.
We multiply that by 1 over the discount rate 5% times
what's in the parentheses.
If we finish this calculation, we're
going to be getting $124,622 roughly.
So that should be the price for this annuity.
Of course, in reality, the insurance company
might be selling at a price that's
a little bit higher than that to pocket some profit.
Next, we consider an annuity with a constant growth rate g
as shown in the cash flow chart here.
The first cash flow arrives in year one at a level a.
Then in year two, the cash flow grows to a times 1 plus g
and so on.
The last cash flow occurs at year t
with the level at a times 1 plus g to the t minus 1th power.
The question is, what is the present value of such annuity?
Well, the present value can be easy
computed by summing up the present value of each
of the cash flow.

If we use the same technique as we did for annuity
with no growth, we arrive at the formula
which is given by the second equation.
And we have two different cases.
In the general case where the growth rate of the cash flow
does not equal to the discount rate r, we have the first line.
In a special case where the growth rate
is the same as the discount rate,
then we have the second line.
If we know the growing annuity starting value, its time
span, and growth rate, and its discount rate,
we can easily compute its present value.
We now consider an example of a growing annuity.
This example resembles a saving plan for retirement.
Suppose that you are now at age of 30
and plan to have $2 million at age of 65 when you retire.
How do you draw up a saving plan to achieve that?
Suppose that at the end of each year,
you will act to save certain amount that grows by 5%
each year reflecting your growth in income.
The question is, how much should you
start saving now assuming that the return on your savings
is 8%?

We can make this calculation by thinking
in the following fashion.
If you want to have $2 million in 35 years,
its present value should be just $2 million
discounted back at 8% 35 times which
is given by the term on the right-hand side
of the equation.
On the left-hand side would be the present value
of the annuity with a growth rate
of 5% starting at the initial level of a.
Solving for a, we'll get the following result
which is $6,473.
That means that, actually, if you
start your savings next year at $6,473
and allow that saving to grow at 5% per year
for 35 years and the return on your savings
is 8%, then by the end of 35 years where you turn 65,
the total amount in your savings account
will be exactly $2 million as you planned.
We now consider another example.
Suppose you just won the lottery and it pays $100,000
a year for 20 years.
Suppose that actually this is the only asset you have.
Are you a millionaire?
Let's assume that actually the right discount rate is 10%.
Well, we can compute the present value
of the stream of cash flow at a level of $100,000 for 20 years.
Plug into the formula for the present value of annuity, what
we arrive at would be $851,356.
That's quite nice, but it's still
short of a million dollars.

What if the payments last for 50 years instead of 20 years?
Well, we use the same formula for the first value
of annuity except that actually now the time span is 50 years.
If we finished a calculation, we'll arrive at $991,481.
Certainly, that's higher than the level before,
but it's still shy of $1 million.

How about if you're going to get $100,000 payment forever?
Well, if we finished our calculation,
the present value of this perpetual annuity
would be exactly $1 million.

This leads us to the next special cash
flow, a perpetuity.
A perpetuity is like an annuity except that it
doesn't have a terminal date.
The cash flow goes on forever.
The present value of perpetuity at a level of a
is simply given by a divide by r, the discount rate
or the rate of return on your investments.

If instead of staying a constant,
the perpetuity also grows at a constant growth rate g,
then we arrive at the perpetuity with the constant growth.
It's cash flow is also shown in the cash flow chart.
It starts at year one at a level a,
and next year, it turns into a times 1 plus g and so on
and continues forever.
The present value of such a perpetuity
with the constant growth rate g is
given by the formula on the slide, namely
a divide by r, the discount rate, minus g, the growth rate.
Here, it must be that the discount rate is
greater than the growth rate.
Otherwise, the present value of this cash flow
would be infinity.
We now consider a simple example.
Let's look at a company, Super Growth,
which plans to pay an annual dividend next year
of $3 per share.
The dividend is expected to grow at 5% per year forever.
We also know that for companies of this risk class,
the expected rate of return is 10%.
What should be Super Growth's share price?
Well, it should be the present value of its future dividends.
We can complete this computation by using the present value
formula for perpetuity with constant growth, which
is given on the right-hand side of the equation.
Namely, $3 for the first dividend,
divide by 10%, which is a discount rate, minus 5%, which
is the growth rate.
And that gives us $60 which should
be the share price today.