
PROFESSOR: In addition to the graph,
we can also compute the average return and some measured risk
for these asset classes.
In this table, we report the average returns, the risks,
and risk premiums from these five asset classes.
Let's first look at the second column,
which gives the mean return on these five asset
classes over the 93 years that we are looking at.
For the short term government bonds,
the average return is 3.4%.
For the long term government bond,
the average return is 5.9%.
Clearly, that's a little bit higher
than the average return on a short term government bonds.
Then the next asset class is long term corporate bonds.
On average, it yields 6.3% return.
And this, again, is a little bit higher than the long term
common bonds.
Then when we move to the stocks, the large stocks
will give us roughly 11.9% average return
over this period, which is quite a bit higher
than the returns we would've got from the bond assets.
Therefore small stocks, the average return will be 16.2%.
The last line, we post the average inflation
over this period, which is 3%.
So if we would take the difference
between the nominal returns on these assets
and the average inflation over this period,
we would have got the real average return on these assets.
For example the real return on short term government bonds
would be 3.4% minus 3% of inflation.
That gives us 0.4% real return on short term government bonds.
While for large stocks, the difference
would have been 11.9 minus 3%.
That's 8.9%.
That will be the average real return on large sized stocks.

So intuitively, as we go down a list,
we are actually going from safer assets, with shorter horizons,
to riskier assets, with longer horizons.
And indeed, as we go down the list,
the average returns also increases.

The next aspect we want to look at
would be the risks of these asset classes.
For the short term government bonds, or the T-bills,
that standard deviation of the returns on an annual basis
will be 3.1%.
However, as we said, the short term government bonds
are not very risky.
The standard deviation here merely reflects the fact
that actually interest rates are moving from year to year.
So that's not really a measure of risk.
It just tells us how much interest rate moves over time.
Now, the next asset class will be long term government bonds.
The standard deviation on their returns will be 9.8%.
That's actually quite a measurable risk.

The long term corporate bonds have a standard deviation
of 8.4%.
Surprisingly, that's a little lower
than the standard deviation of long term government bonds.
And we'll come back to talk about this seemingly unusual
feature.
Then the next asset class will be large stocks.
And the standard deviation on large stocks on annual bases
will be 19.8%.
Clearly that's a lot higher than the standard deviation
of returns, on either the government bond
or the corporate bond.
Therefore small stocks, the standard deviation
is even higher.
It would be 31.6% on annual basis.
If we're using standard deviation
as a simple measure of risk, clearly it
lines up with our intuition.
Namely, as we go down the list, the assets
are risky intuitively, and clearly
the standard deviation on returns are also increasing.

The third column gives that risk premium for each of these asset
classes.
It basically gives us the difference
between the average return minus the risk-free rate.
So for example, for long term government bonds,
its risk premium would be 2.5%.
That is given by the difference between its average return,
which is 5.9 minus the risk-free rate, which
is given by the average return on a short term government
bonds as 3.4.
So that difference is 2.5.
If we go down to large size stocks,
the average return over the period is 11.9,
and then the risk-free rate is 3.4.
Take that difference, we'll get 8.5%.
So 8.5% could be a rough gauge of the risk premium for stocks.

What we are learning from this table
would be some rough estimate that
will give us some magnitudes about the discount
rates for assets with different risk levels,
or their risk premiums.
We'll develop more sophisticated tools
to help us determine the right discount rate for a given
asset, more precisely.