
PROFESSOR: The key input in asset valuation
is the discount rate, or the rate of return
as expected by the market.
It depends on the timing and risk of an asset's payoff.
We will devote more time later on this relationship.
For now, we would like to get a rough idea
about the rates of return on a set of broad asset
classes traded in the market, with a range of timing and risk
characteristics.
They will give us an empirical sense
on the magnitudes of discount rates
and their dependence on timing and risk.
We will start with some notation and definitions.
We'll use P0 to denote the price of an asset
at the beginning of a period.
P1 will be its price at the end of the period, which
is generally uncertain, at least at the beginning of the period.
D1 gives the dividend at the end of the period, which
is also uncertain.
We can then define the return or the rate of return
from the asset over this given period.
r denotes notes the return, which is
given by D1 plus P1 minus P0.
That gives the net payoff at the end
of the period, divided by P0 which
is the initial investment.

The rate of return, of course, is in general uncertain given
that D1 and P1 are uncertain.
However, we can still compute the expected rate
of return, which is the expected value of the realized return.
We denote that by r bar.
If an asset is riskless, its return
which we'll then note by rF, is sometimes
called the risk-free rate, which reflects
the time value of money.
There is no risk here.
For a risky asset, its return net of the risk-free rate
is often called the excess return.
This is the return in excess of the risk-free return,
and typically this reflects the compensation for the risk
that we are bearing by investing in this asset.
The expected value of the excess return,
which is given by r bar minus rF,
is also called the risk premium on the asset,
or the price of risk.
It gives us the expected compensation
for bearing the risk of investing in this asset.
We now consider the returns on the major asset classes
traded in the US market over a fairly long period,
from 1926 to 2018.
It will give us a sense about the returns
and risks of these assets.
Going from shorter horizon and lower risk
to longer horizon and higher risk,
we consider five asset classes.
The first is the short-term government bonds, also called
treasury bills.
They have cash rules typically over a horizon
of no more than a year, and they are fairly safe.
The next asset class will be long-term government bonds,
and they have payoffs over a time horizon
typically more than a year, and they probably
are riskier than the short-term government bonds.
The next asset class will be corporate bonds.
These are bonds issued by corporations,
and they are typically riskier than long-term government
bonds.
It is not shown in the figure, because it
will be too close to the plot for government bonds.
Then the next asset class is large-sized stocks.
These are stocks issued by large companies.
And the last asset class will be small-sized stocks.
These are stocks issued by small companies.
In addition, we also include the inflation index,
which reflects the price appreciation of real goods.
Presumably assets in each one of these asset classes
have risk levels that is sort of comparable,
while across different asset classes
the risk levels could be quite different.
What is shown in the plot is the cumulative returns
on $1 invested in any one of these asset classes
at the end of 1925 to the end of 2018, over a total of 93 years.
What we can look at is actually these five asset classes,
starting from the ones with lower risks.
We'll first start with inflation,
which is given by the blue dashed line
at the bottom of the plot.
For $1 invested at the end of 1925 by the end of 2018,
it will be worth $14.02.
The next line up, the red dashed line,
is the cumulative return from $1 invested over this period
in short-term government bonds.
So that $1 at the end of 1925 would have turned into $21.17.
As we can see from the return of short-term government bonds,
the returns are not very high, but it's very smooth.
It reflects a fairly safe and low return over time.
The third line is the blue line, and that
reflects the cumulative return from investing
in a $1 in long-term government bonds.
That $1 at the end of 1925 would have turned into $142.
This is quite bit higher than what
we would have got by investing in short-term government bonds.
However, nothing is free.
If we look at the cumulative return line, it is more wiggly.
It can go up and down.
That reflects the risk from investing
in long-term government bonds.
Then the next line up is the lighter red line
that reflects the cumulative return from investing
in large-sized stocks.
So $1 at the end of 1925 would turn into $7,030
by the end of 2018.
That's a lot higher than the $142
we would have got by investing in long-term government bonds.
Now of course, this high return is not free either.
If you look at the line itself, it
wiggles a lot more largely than the blue line,
which is the investment in long-term government bonds.
And clearly this reflects a much higher level of risk
from stocks.
Then the very top line gives the cumulative return
from investing in small-sized stocks.
So $1 at the end of 1925 would have turned into $32,645.
That's quite a bit higher than the total return
from investing in large stocks.

From this chart, we can clearly see as we go from the bottom
to the top, we are looking at asset classes
with increasing levels of risk, but also we're
getting over this period of time, a higher return.

This indicates a connection, a positive connection,
between the level of risk and the return
we will get from that asset traded in a market.
In this relationship is going to be
the focus of our future analysis of different asset
pricing models and risk analysis.