JOHN CORE: Now for problem 1, so you've worked on problem 1.
As a reminder, problem 1 asked you to do a balance sheet
equation for income taxes.
Second, it asked you to do a balance sheet equation
for Tesla valuation allowance in 2019.
And third, it asked you to think about what
would happen if Tesla's US taxable income was either
$1 billion higher than it was in 2019 or $1 billion lower
than it was in 2019.
So let's first look at the balance sheet
equation for income taxes.
We're taking all this information out of note 15
of the financial statements.
Notice that this is the current taxes that we've seen before.
So Tesla paid cash taxes in 2019 of $91 million.
Its accounting expense for taxes was $110 million.
And the difference between that is an increase in its deferred
tax liability of $19 million.
The second part of the question asked
you to do the balance sheet equation for Tesla's valuation
allowance in 2019.
Again, this comes out of this table in note 15.
You can see that from the table the valuation allowance
increased by $91 million.
And to reflect that in the balance sheet equation,
we're going to want to increase the valuation allowance contra
asset.
And that's going to result in an increase in income tax expense.
And we can also see the same answer in a different format
in this table, which shows us the change
and the net operating loss carryforwards.
So Tesla's net operating loss carryforwards
increased in 2019, as did their valuation allowance.
So an answer of $150 million change
from the valuation allowance from this table
is also a good answer.
And then finally, notice the Tesla in their annual report
said, we intend to keep increasing this valuation
allowance so long as we have increases
in deferred taxes or net operating loss carryforwards.
And essentially what Tesla is telling you
there is that they do not expect to be
profitable for US tax purposes for many years in the future.
So if you ever see this language change in their annual report,
that would be good news for somebody that
was positive on Tesla's stock.
So if Tesla's US taxable income was $1 billion higher,
we know that they've got $2 billion
of net operating loss carryforwards
from the prior slide.
So those net operating loss carryforwards
would offset those higher income.
And Tesla would owe $0 in extra taxes.
Conversely, if their taxable income was $1 billion lower,
because they've got currently negative US taxable income,
they're not paying US taxes.
That extra loss will make their taxable income even more
negative.
And it will create an additional net operating
loss carryforward.
So it will result in the near term in no extra taxes.
