
JOHN CORE: The problem with 3 asked you about Tesla's stock
offering in 2019.
And so we're going to split this up into parts.
First, I ask you about the par value
if Tesla issued r million shares of stock.
And the reason I'm asking you it this way
is because Tesla in their annual report
rounds all their figures to $1 million.
So then we want to think about what's
a par value of 4 million shares of common stock
if we round it to millions of dollars.
Then finally, that will allow us to do the balance sheet
equation for this equity issuance.
And then as a side issue, again, because of the rounding issues,
we're going to ask, based solely on the information in the 10K,
how many shares did Tesla actually issue in this offer.
So our first part is, what's the par value of 4 million shares.
So if Tesla sold 4 million shares of common stock,
what would be their par value?
So from the face of the balance sheet,
which is on page 65 of the 10K, we know that Tesla's stock has
a par value of 1/1,000 of $1.
So if we multiply 4 million times 1/1,000 of a dollar,
that gives us $4,000 as the par value of 4 million shares.
The trick, though, is Tesla reports in millions.
So what's the par value of 4 million shares of common stock
if we convert it to millions?
So we'll take that same $4,000 par
value, divide it by $1 million, and that
gives us a par value of 0.004.
And when we round that to the nearest millions,
the par value of that common stock is $0 millions.
So here's some data from the 10K on pages 68 and 69
of their 2019 10K.
So first of all, we look for evidence
from their statement of cash flows.
So in their cash flow from financing statement,
we see that they raised $848 million in this offering.
Then on page 68, we see that from their statement
on shareholders' equity that they issued three shares.
So that's rounded three shares.
And those three shares had a par value,
as we talked about a minute ago, of $0.
An additional paid-in-capital was $848 million.
And because of the fact, as we talked about before, because
of the fact that cash is equal to additional paid-in-capital,
we know that Tesla recorded the underwriting expenses, which
are in a red box there, of $15 million.
They recorded those underwriting expenses
as a reduction of additional paid-in-capital.
So here's our balance sheet equation taking
that information.
So cash went up when Tesla issued these shares
by $848 million.
We know that there was an increase
in the par value of common stock, but that rounds to $0
again.
An additional paid-in-capital goes up, again,
by $848 million.

Now the final question in this segment
is based solely on the information in the 10K.
How many shares did Tesla issue?
We know that Tesla raised $848 million.
We know that they paid $!5 million worth of offering
expenses.
We know that the issuance price of the stock was $243 a share.
So our best guess is the number of shares
that Tesla issued is 3,551,440.
And then if we're interested in exactly what the number is,
and this is not something I ask you to do,
we can go to their prospective supplement
where they actually tell you the details of this offering
after it happens.
They tell you that they issued 3.549 million shares
at a price of $243.
And that gives them gross proceeds of $863 million.
If we subtract $15 million of underwriting expenses,
then we come back to the number that we know,
which is $848 million net proceeds.
So that's problem 3.