
PROFESSOR: Problem 4 is also asking you
about Tesla's offerings, but this is a convertible debt
offering.
And I've broken this down into four questions.
First, what's the value of the bond payment?
So that's principal and interest payments
that this bond is going to pay discounted
at the market rate of interest.
So we have to figure out what the market rate of interest is.
And then once we figure that out,
what's the balance sheet equation for the issue ignoring
issuance cost?
And then we're just going to also say,
what's the balance sheet equation for the issuance
cost separately?
And then finally, just to summarize everything,
we're going to ask you to account for the first six
months of interest.
And here's some verbiage that I've collected out
of Tesla's annual report talking about these convertible senior
notes due 2024.
So we issued them in May 2019.
We issued $1.84 billion in 2% convertible notes.
Net proceeds from the issuance after issuance costs
were $1.82 million--
$1.82 billion.
So that we know the issuance costs from this
were $20 million.
And then it tells us the debt discount
is being amortized at an effective interest
rate of 8.68%.
So that's the market interest rate
that we're going to use for later computations.
And it also tells us that if Tesla had issued straight debt
with no conversion feature, the effective interest
rate on that straight debt would have been 8.68%.
So by including the conversion feature,
as we talked about in a recent session,
Tesla is saving the difference between 8.68% interest, which
is what it would have paid, versus 2% interest,
which is what it is paying.
And that 6.68% savings reflects the fact
that Tesla has attached a conversion feature, where
the holders of these notes can turn them
into a stock at an attractive rate sometime in the future.
So finally, what the verbiage here on the slide says
is that each of the $1,000 of the notes
is convertible into 3.2276 shares of stock.
So that's a conversion price of $310, basically.
And that was 28% above the price at the time
the things were offered.
And that, in turn, means that the shares issued on conversion
are $1.84 billion divided by 1,000 times the conversion
factor, or we would issue about 5.9 million shares
if these notes converted.
So this is a slide that we've seen before, and it seems--
8.68% interest seems huge in the current environment.
But notice that this slide shows the yields on Tesla's 5.3%
straight debt have gone up over time
since it was issued, up until the recent past
in the 9% range.
So at the time that they offered the 2024 notes,
the market interest rate on the 5.3% bonds were close to 9%.
And so that's where the 8.68% interest is coming from.
Now, in terms of discounting the payments
on the new convertible senior notes,
remember these are five-year notes,
so there'll be 10 payments.
The interest expense on the notes
is $1.84 billion times 2% divided by 2
to make it same semiannual.
So the interest expense is $18.4 million semiannually.
Of course, the principal comes due
as well as the interest at the end of the fifth year,
or in other words, at the end of the 10th semi-annual period.
That's what's shown in the second column.
In the third column, we're just discounting those cash flows
at the market rate of interest, which is 8.68% divided by 2,
or 4.34%.
And then we come up with a present value of these notes
of about $1.35 billion.
So the difference between the value
of the straight debt, which is $1.35 billion,
and the notes themselves, which is $1.84 billion,
that difference is $490 million.
And remember, we talked in the class about convertible debt,
that this gives you a value for the conversion option.
And by contrast, Tesla calculates a number
that's very close but a little different,
which is $491 million for the conversion option.
And the difference, of course, is
there is probably some rounding error, and part of the fact
is that when we did our calculation a minute ago,
we didn't account for the fact that the debt maturity is not
exactly 10 years.
So here's our balance sheet equation having gathered
this information.
We know that we got cash of 18--
$1.84 billion, ignoring the issuance cost.
We issued notes with a face value of $1.84 billion.
The discount on the notes is $491 million.
So net notes payable is $1.349 billion.
And the difference between the face value
of the notes and the net notes payable
is going to, again, with these convertible notes, is
going to go to additional paid-in capital of $491
million.
And the balance sheet equation, of course,
with the issuance cost is that cash goes down,
and then we're going to capitalize those issuance
costs of $20 million.
Now, finally, this slide is just a reminder slide
from our bond discussion.
So remember, for financial reporting purposes,
interest expense is the market rate
at the time the bond is issued.
That's our 8.68% here, times the net bond payable,
which is $1.349 billion.
Conversely, interest payable is the coupon rate,
which is 2% times the face amount or the par amount,
which is the $1.84 billion.
And then as a reminder, any difference between these two
is going to be amortized against either the bond discount
account, which is what we have in this case,
or a bond premium account.
So accounting for the first six months of interest then,
looking over on the right.
So again, our interest expense is the net bond
payable of $1.349 billion times the market
rate at interest rate--
market interest rate, which is 8.68%,
divided by 2 to make it semiannual.
So the interest expense is $58.5 million.
As we saw earlier, the coupon payment is $18.4 million,
and the $40.1 million difference between these things
is the amortization of the discount.
So that's our accounting using the balance sheet equation
for the first six months of interest.
