
PROFESSOR: So the ninth problem, which
is a final problem that I asked you to do,
is to think what happened-- what would the value of Tesla
be if there were a takeover offer at $1,500 a share?
I know that it's a little bit unrealistic,
because Tesla's stock price is obviously greater than $1,500
a share.
But let's just suppose for this example
that they get a takeover offer at $1,500 per share.
We want to value the shares outstanding.
We want to value the options outstanding
using the Treasury stock method that we learned about earlier.
And then we want to value the convertible notes outstanding
using the if converted method that we also
learned about earlier.
So we get the data.
Part of it is from the face of the balance sheet.
So the face of the balance sheet tells us
that Tesla has 181 million shares outstanding.
In the footnotes-- and we talked about this in an earlier
problem--
we know about the information in the 2024 converts
from the footnotes for the financial statements.
And then we also can get stock option information
from the footnotes from the financial statement.
And that tells us there are about 30 million stock
options outstanding.
And the exercise price is $279.49 per share.
So first let's value the common shares outstanding.
So that's easy.
So there's 181 million shares outstanding.
We're assuming a share price of $1,500
in this pretend takeover.
And that gives us a value for the common shares outstanding
of 271 and 1/2 billion dollars, which is a big company.
So Tesla is now one of the biggest 20 companies
by market capitalization on the US stock exchanges.
Next thing we want to do is value the options outstanding.
So again, options outstanding, we
have about 30 million options outstanding.
The exercise price on these options is about $279.
And what the Treasury stock method does
is that we assume that all the options outstanding are
exercised at that $279 price.
And then that would give us exercise price proceeds
of about $8 billion.
We use that $8 billion to repurchase shares
at a price of $1,500 a share.
So we could repurchase 5 and 1/2 million shares.
So the net new shares that are going
to be issued if all these options get exercised
at $1,500 a share are about 24.4 million shares.
And then if we value them at $1,500 a share,
that gives us a value of about $36.6 billion
in terms of the options outstanding.
Finally, we need to value the converts using
the if convert method.
So I'm just going to focus on what we were asked here, was
the 2024 notes.
Remember, there's $1.84 billion of 2024 notes outstanding.
They have a conversion ratio of 3.2276 shares per $1,000.
So if all the notes convert, there
would be about 5.9 million shares.
And if we value those 5.9 million shares
at $1,500 a share, we come up with almost $9 billion
for those shares.
And so here I presented a table that
shows the value of the common stock,
the value of the options, and the value of three
of the major converts outstanding.
And what's interesting about this
and what is a key takeaway for US professionals is
for a techie company like this, if you buy the whole company,
the common shares outstanding in Tesla's case
are only worth 83% of the company.
You've got to also come up with a lot of money--
in this case, that's over $55 billion from the options
and from the three convertible securities--
to buy out the options and to buy out the convertible shares
outstanding.