
PROFESSOR: So pulling this all together--
and this is our final segment here
that we're going to work through--
we're going to compute free cash flow to equity, which
is equal to cash flow from operations minus capital
expenditures minus required debt and least principal payments.
Recall that CFO, or cash flow from operations,
reflects cash interest on debt and leases,
so we only subtract principal payments.
So Tesla's estimated free cash flow to equity in 2021--
I'm going to assume that cash flow from operations
is the same, so it's about $2.4 billion.
I'm going to assume capital expenditure's the same--
about $1.4 billion.
That gives us the free cash flow that we computed
earlier of $973 million.
Remember, we talked about debt principal
that need to be repaid--
$1.4 billion in 2020, $2.3 billion in 2021.
But if we assume that the stock price is above $360 a share,
some of this debt-- $103 million of the debt
will turn into stocks, so we don't
have to come up with cash for it in 2020.
And then $1.38 billion worth of the debt
will turn into stock in 2021.
And then here's where we computed--
the least principal do is $401 million in 2020
and $423 million in 2021.
So notice that, when we computed all of this out,
the free cash flow left over for the equity is about minus $800
million in 2020, and it's about minus $1.7 billion in 2021.
If this negative free cash flow from equity persists,
then stockholders will need to contribute more capital
through stock sales for Tesla to survive.
Ultimately, for a company to have value for stockholders,
free cash flow from equity must be positive.
That means that Tesla has to sell equity in these scenarios
equal to $800 million in 2020 and equal to $1.7 billion
in 2021, because of the fact that it's not generating
enough cash flow from operations and it
has to repay lots of debt so that its free cash
flow to equity is negative.
So that's our base scenario.
Now, as we all know, we're living in a world of COVID,
and COVID affected Tesla, because Tesla's plants
were closed, among other ways that affected Tesla.
Tesla's California plant was closed
for most of the first quarter--
for all of the first quarter and part of the second quarter,
so Tesla's sales have dipped compared
where they were last year.
So that brings the question, if you
want to form a bear case for Tesla, maybe think about,
how much cash flow from operations, first of all,
would Tesla generate if Tesla's sales decreased by 50%?
And to make this a little simpler,
we're going to assume that all of Tesla's sales are for cash.
This is reasonable, because if you look at the balance,
sheet Tesla has small accounts receivable.
And then we that cash sales are going to go down by 50%,
so if cash sales go down by 50%, will cash operating
expenses also go down by 50%?
And this is a little bit subtle, but think
about depreciation charges.
So that's a non-cash charge.
Non-cash depreciation charges won't change,
so when sales go down by 50%, operating expenses
are going to go down by less than 50%,
because those fixed charges, like depreciation,
are not going to change.
And therefore, since cash expenses
are going to decrease slower than cash sales are going
to decrease, cash flow from operations
is going to decrease by more than 50%.
And what we're going to do in the next slides
is just try to ballpark how much of a decrease
there will be in cash flow from operations,
if cash sales decrease by 50%.
So to do this, let's just look at a summary of Tesla's 2019
income statement.
So I just put the income items into buckets.
So we've got revenue or sales.
We got operating expenses, which are cost of goods sold,
selling general expenses, research and development
expenses, and other expenses.
They're almost as big as revenue.
We've got interest expense.
We've got taxes.
And then that gives us Tesla's net income, or net loss--
$775 million.
I'm going to do the same thing with their cash flow statement.
So this is their cash flow from operations.
It starts with their net loss of $775 million.
And then I'm at a group all these non-cash operating
expenses together-- so depreciation,
stock-based compensation, and other.
That's a $3.3 billion add-back.
And as we talked about earlier in the session,
part of the interest expense is non-cash,
so we're going to add back the non-cash interest
expense of about $188 million.
And as we noticed at the very beginning of this session,
there's deferred taxes of $19 million.
We're going to add back those, and then we're
going to subtract off the changes in working capital
to get cash flow from operations.
And then we're going to put it together.
So the first column that says income
is just the income statement that I just showed you.
The second column, which is called adjustments,
are the adjustments that we just saw in the cash flow statement.
And then, when we add those across, based on our assumption
that revenue is all cash--
so cash revenue is $24 and 1/2 billion.
Operating expenses that are cash are about $21 billion.
Cash interest, again, is about $500 million cash.
Cash taxes are $91 million.
Then we take the changes in working capital,
and that allows us to recharacterize the cash flow
statement as a cash income statement.
So having done that, we take this cash income
statement, which is the first column on this table--
we had $2.4 billion in cash flow from operations in 2019,
and this consisted of cash sales of about $24
and 1/2 billion minus cash expenses of about $22 billion.
And then pro forma for this 50% change--
revenue's going to drop by 50%.
Our cash operating expenses, we're going to assume,
are going to drop by 50%.
Cash interest is not going to change
because we can't change how much we pay back our debt holders.
Cash taxes are not going to change, again,
because we cannot change how much cash taxes we pay
to various governments.
We're going to assume that the working capital changes are
going to be cut by 50%.
And then, consistent with the intuition that we developed
earlier, pro forma cash flow from operations
in the third column is about $900 million,
which is well less than 50% of 2019 cash flow from operations
of $2.4 billion.
In this slide, let's recompute cash
flow to equity, assuming that Tesla sells
50% less in 2020 and in 2021.
So this is the same chart that we saw a few minutes ago,
except we're putting the lower cash flow from operations
in the top.
We're, again, subtracting off capex.
That gives us negative free cash flow.
We're subtracting off a debt principal.
And then, assuming that Tesla sales fall this much,
we're going to assume that maybe the price falls
below $300 a share.
So it's not going to be converting that debt
into stock, which saves cash, but it's
going to have to pay all the cash back
on the debt principal.
We got our lease principal, and then we've
got free cash flow from equity of minus $2.3 billion in 2020
and minus $3.2 billion in 2021--
so that Tesla, in this bear case,
if they, in fact, sold 50% less in 2020 than they did in 2021,
their free cash flow to equity would be very negative,
and this would push the company back
towards where we saw it in the middle of 2019, which
is flirting with bankruptcy.
So again, in this session, we essentially reviewed
material and synthesized material
that we learned early in the course.
So we reviewed taxes, we reviewed leases,
we reviewed debt and equity, and we reviewed a lot of things.
And we looked at Tesla's financial statement in detail
with a focus on cash flow.
And I hope that I'm leaving you with a takeaway here
that helps you think about valuation issues
as you move on to your valuation and corporate finance courses.