
PROFESSOR: Hi, everyone.
Welcome to the eighth recitation of the Financial Accounting
course.
In this recitation, we'll cover shareholders' equity.
Specifically, we'll cover a common stock and Treasury
stock, hybrid instruments, calculating
earnings per share for both basic and diluted, and stock
compensation.
Before getting into shareholders' equity,
Let's discuss a little bit about equity financing
in order for companies to grow and be profitable,
they need to take on projects or make investments.
Companies can only take on these projects
if they have cash or capital.
Typically, cash generated from day-to-day operations alone
cannot generate enough cash to take on large projects.
So what can companies do if they need more cash?
They can either borrow money through a loan
or issuing bonds, which we covered in last class,
or issue stock, which is equity.
When a company issues common stock,
they give the investors access to two types
of rights, ownership rights and voting rights.
Holding common stock ensures that you
have a piece of the company, meaning
you're entitled to some proportion of profits
according to your stock holdings.
For example, if an investor holds
10% of the common stock of a firm,
the investor is entitled to 10% of the earnings.
Similarly, holding stocks entitles you to voting rights.
In this example, the investor has
10% of the voting rights of a company.
A single investor holding 51% of the company,
therefore, can make most, if not all,
of the company's major decisions due to the majority ownership
the investor has.
To account for common stock, common stock
is recorded in two separate accounts
on the balance sheet, par value and additional paid-in capital.
Par value represents the amount of equity using the par,
or the face, value of each shares.
For example, if a firm issues 100 shares and its shares
are $1 per share at the face value,
then you would record $100 of par value equity
on the balance sheet.
The additional paid-in capital represents
the additional capital received on top
of the $100, which is $900.