
PROFESSOR: Question 1-- common stock, part A, issuance.
Use the balance sheet equation to record
the issuance of 1 million shares of common stock
for $45 per share and assume no par value.
Sits par value is 0, we record 45 times 1 million shares,
$45 million of increase in cash, and $45 million increase
of additional paid in capital.
Use the BSE to record the issuance
of $1 million shares of $1 par value common stock,
or $45 per share.
In this case, the par value of each common stock is $1,
and the firm issued 1 million shares.
Cash increases by $45 million, as before.
But on the equity side, par value common stock increases
by 1 million and the remaining $44 million increase
at additional paid in capital.
Part B-- let's solve an example regarding issuance.
Expenses.
Now suppose ABC Company works with an investment bank
who underwrites the deal.
ABC Company issues 1 million shares of $1 par common stock
for $50 a share, but incurs $3 million
of underwriting expenses.
Use the BSE, assuming ABC Company
capitalizes issuance costs.
Regardless of capitalizing or not
capitalizing issuance costs, the actual cash proceeds
received from issuing equity is $47 million.
So cash increases by $47 million,
and capitalized issuance costs, which is an asset item,
increases by $3 million, the underwriting expense.
The equity side remains similar to the previous question.
Par value of common stock increases by 1 million,
and additional paid-in capital increases by $49 million.
This time use the BSE, assuming ABC Company reduces APIC
by issuance costs.
Again, cash increases by $47 million.
On the equity side, however, common stock
increases by 1 million, in additional paid
in capital increases by $46 million,
because issuance costs are not capitalized.
Part C were purchases.
When a company repurchases stock,
it is said to be held in treasury
and goes into the Treasury stock account.
This is a contra equity account.
Keeping this in mind, suppose management
at ABC Company repurchases 100,000 shares
at $30 per share.
Use the BSE to record this transaction.
ABC Company used up three million of cash
to repurchase its stocks.
Cash decreases by $3 million and Treasury stock account,
which is a contra equity account increases by $3 million.
Now use the BSE to record the transaction
to reissue 30,000 shares held in treasury at $40 a share.
Cash increased by $1.2 million, because the company issued
30,000 shares at $40 per share.
Since the firm reissued the stocks held in treasury,
treasury stock decreases by $5.9 million
because it repurchased its shares at $30 per share
in the previous question.
To balance the equation out, additional
paid-in capital increases by $300,000.
Part D-- stocks splits.
Occasionally, a company will engage in a stock split.
This affects the number of shares outstanding
and the stock price.
But typically, it does not affect the account balances.
Suppose ABC Company has 1 million shares outstanding,
trading at $45 a share, and engages in a 3 to 1
stock split.
How many shares outstanding after the split?
It is a 3 to 1 stock split, meaning
total shares outstanding increases by 3 times.
So 3 million that are outstanding after the split.
What is the share price immediately
following the split?
Again, this is pretty simple.
The price per share decreases by 1/3.
So the share price drops to 1/3 of the original share price.
The answer is $15.
What is the BSE entry to record this Transaction only
the number of shares outstanding shares changed,
so there isn't any effect on the balance sheet.