
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to find factor risk premia or factor risk prices.
Let's consider the following three factor model.
We are given four well-diversified portfolios--
A, B, C, and D--
with the following characteristics.
So we are given the expected returns and factor loadings
on all three factors.
So now, given this information, in particular the returns
and factor loadings, the goal is to find factor risk
premia for all three factors.

We can start with APT pricing equation that tells us
that the expected excess return on a portfolio p
should equal to the factor risk premia multiplied
by their factor loadings.
So for example, in our case, when we have three factor
model, it's the price of the first factor
lambda 1 multiplied by the loading on this first factor
of portfolio p, so beta p1.
Plus the price of the second risk factor
multiplied by the loading of this portfolio
p on the second risk factor, plus the price
of the third risk factor times the loading.
So we can write this down specifically for portfolio A.
So in this case, it's going to be expected return portfolio
A minus the risk-free rate, equals to, again,
the prices of the factors multiplied
by the risk exposure of this portfolio A to these factors.
So more specifically, we can plug in the numbers
that we are given in this question.
So for portfolio A, the expected return was 21.65%.
And the factor loadings were 0.95 from the first factor,
1.2 on the second, and 0.85 on the third.
And now, what we can do, we can write down
the same exact equations for the remaining three portfolios.
So here, we have four equations written
for each of the portfolios.
And so these are the APT pricing equations.
And so if we look at this carefully,
we will see that we have four equations and four unknowns.
Therefore, we can write down the following system of equations.
We can write down the system of equations
in the following matrix form.
And now, all we have to do is we have
to solve this equation for the three lambdas, which, again,
the prices of the three corresponding risk factors
and the risk-free rate.
So solving this equation gives us the following numbers.
So the price of the first risk factor is 6.5%.
The price of the second risk factor is 10%.
The price of the third risk factor is 3.5%.
And the risk-free rate here is 0.5%.
And this is how you find factor risk
premia from known expected returns and factor loadings.
Notice that, in this case, we have a three factor model,
and we don't know risk-free rate.
So therefore, we need expected the returns and factor loadings
on at least four well-diversified portfolios
to find all the risk premia and the risk-free rate.
If we were already given the risk-free rate,
we only needed three well-diversified portfolios
to find factor risk premia.
Now, finally, once we know the factor risk
premia and the risk-free rate in this economy,
we can price all the other well-diversified portfolios
as long as we know their factor loadings.
And knowing the factor loadings and the factor risk premia,
we should be able to find their expected returns.