
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will consider
a frame over a factor model.
And I will teach you how to compute standard deviations
and correlations of returns on individual assets
or individual stocks.
We will start with a two-factor model.
So the volatility of the first factor,
or the standard deviation of factor 1 is 7%.
The volatility of the second factor is 5%.
There are two stocks, A and B. Stock A
has the following loadings.
So it has a loading of 1 on factor 1 and loading of 1.5
on factor 2.
The idiosyncratic volatility of the stock A is 25%.
Stock B has loading of 2, or its beta on the first factor
equals to 2.
And the loading on factor 2 equals to 3.
The idiosyncratic risk of the volatility of the stock B
is 10%.
In the first question, we'll compute the standard deviations
of returns of these two stocks, so stock A and stock B. Let's
start with writing down the expression for the variance
of returns on stock A. The returns on stock A
are given by the following, again, factor
model, the following expression.
So we need to compute the variance of this.
So this is a scalar because this is the expected
value of random variable ri.
So the variance of this is going to be 0.
So then we are left with these three expressions.
So we will have the variances of these individual terms
plus the pairwise covariances.
So let's start with the first term.
So the variance of this is going to be equal to beta,
or the first loading, beta 1 squared,
multiplied by the variance of the first factor of 1
plus the second beta, the second loading squared multiplied
by this variance, plus the variance
of these idiosyncratic components, so idiosyncratic
risk--
so this is the last part here-- so variance
of epsilon A, plus pairwise correlations.
So the first one would be the covariance between the returns
on factor 1 and factor 2.
So this is 2 times the betas times the covariance
between the returns on factor 1 and the returns on factor 2.
And plus the covariance is between f1
and the idiosyncratic risk of stock A,
so epsilon A, and f2 and epsilon 2.
Now by construction, remember that this is a factor model.
So by definition, the covariance is
between the returns and factors and idiosyncratic risk.
This is why it is idiosyncratic risk.
So this covariance, it will be 0.
Now in addition to this--
so recall that when we discussed this in the lecture,
we said that in theory, returns and factors, of course,
could be correlated.
But here we'll assume that this covariance would equal to 0.
So that the returns on factors f1
and f2 in this particular example would be uncorrelated.
So I'll get rid of this term.
Now, let's compute the variance of returns on stock A.
Since we assume that the covariance or the correlation
between the returns on factor 1 and 2
is 0, so these two factors are uncorrelated,
we are left with just these three terms.
So to compute the variance for stock A,
we're taking first beta or the loading on the first factor,
squaring it, so 1 squared, multiply it
by the variance of the first factor.
So we're given a standard deviation, 7%.
So we're squaring the 7%.
Plus we have the second beta, 1.5, square it,
multiplying it by the variance of the second factor,
this is the standard deviation that we are given, squared.
Plus the variance of the idiosyncratic risk of stock A,
this is 25% squared.
Computing this gives us 0.073%.
So this is the variance.
To find the standard deviation of the returns on the stock A,
we are taking the square root of this variance, square root
of 0.073.
And this gives us 27%.
So therefore, the volatility of the returns on this stock A
is 27%.
We can repeat this calculation for stock B.
So it's exactly the same expression.
So I take the first beta or the loading on the first factor,
multiplying it with the variance of the first factor
the loading on the second factor squared, multiplying
by the variance of the returns of the second factor, so 5%
squared.
Plus idiosyncratic variance, it's 10% squared.
Computing this gives us 0.052%.
So this is the variance of returns on stock B.
To find the standard deviation, we're
taking the square root of this, which gives us 22.8%.
So the volatility of the returns on stock B is 22.8%.
Now notice that the volatility of returns on the first stock
is higher than the volatility of the returns
on the second stock, even though stock B seems
to be risky because it has, or at least
in terms of systematic risk, it has much higher loadings
on systematic returns factors.
But, of course, what makes stock A overall riskier
than stock B is the fact that it has much higher idiosyncratic
volatility, 25% versus 10% for stock B.
So that directly feeds into overall higher risk for stock A
compared to the overall risk for stock B.