
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will work with data
and we will learn how to implement arbitrage pricing
theory model in practice.
We will consider a two factor model
that has the market and the price of gold as the risk
factors.
The price of gold can be a risk factor in its own.
Or it can correlate with other risk factors.
For example, inflation.
To proxy for these two risk factors,
we will use factor mimicking portfolios.
For the market factor, we will use the returns
on the market portfolio.
And for the price of gold, we will use the returns
on the Spider Gold Shares ETF.
On your screen, you can see a snippet
from the fact sheet of this ETF, which is traded
under the ticker symbol GLD.
We will implement this model by using returns on eight firms.
Four of these firms up from the gold mining industry.
And the other four are from the technology industry.
These firms are listed on your screen.
In this file, I have monthly return data
on each of these eight stocks.
So for each of them, the sample covers January 2005 all the way
through December 2019.
So for each of these stocks, we have 15 years
worth of monthly return data.
So the return for a given month on each of the stocks
is given in column C. The column next to it,
column D contains the risk free rates.
Column E contains the return on the market portfolio.
And column F contains the returns on the GLD ETF.
And all of this data is organized by firm.
So this is the first firm, then I have the second firm
and so forth.
So I have eight of these blocks corresponding
to each of the stocks.
Now, recall that, to implement the APT model
in our particular case where we have two risk factors--
the market and the price of gold--
we have to run the following regression.
So we have to regress the excess return
on the excess return on the market portfolio
and the excess return on the gold ETF.
And this regression has to include the constant, as well.
So therefore, to run this regression,
first I am computing excess return on each of the stocks
by taking the return and subtracting the risk free rate.
Next, I'm computing the excess market return
where I'm taking the return on the market portfolio.
And again, subtracting the risk free rate.
And then I'm doing the same thing for the GLD ETF.
So I'm computing the excess return on this ETF
by taking its return and subtracting the risk free rate.
Now, we are ready to run this regression.
There are several ways of running linear regression
in Excel.
I'm going to be using a function that is called LINEST.
So because this is a multiple regression,
I will be estimating three coefficients.
So the lowering on each of the two risk
factors and a constant.
So the way I'm going to implement this function
is it's an array function.
So I am highlighting these three cells
and I will write the following.
So I'll say LINEST.
And the first input into this function
would be the left hand side variable,
which is our excess return on the stock.
So this column.
And the next input will be the metrics of the right hand side
variables, which would be these two.

Then for constant and for statistics, I will say yes.
Because I do want to have a constant estimated,
because this is the way to run this regression.
And then I will also say 1 for the loss parameter.
And then recall that this is a rate function.
So I have to hit Shift, Control, and Enter at the same time.
Now, notice that the way this function works is it
actually gives the estimate of the coefficients
from this regression as the lost number.
And the first number is actually in the reverse order of the way
they appear in the matrix.
So the first estimate is the estimate on gold.
And the second is the estimate on the market.
Now let's estimate this regression
for the remaining firms.
I'll show you how to estimate it for the next firm.
And then, I will let you do the rest of the exercise yourself.
So I'm, again, highlighting the three cells.
I'm writing LINEST.
I'm going down to the portion of the file
where half the returns in the corresponding stock.
So I'm highlighting my y's first.
Next, I'm highlighting my x's.
So it's these two columns.
Then I'll say 1 and 1.
And then I will hit Shift, Control, Enter.
And you will see that this process estimates
the coefficients again on gold market and the intercept.
Now I have estimated all eight regressions
and these are the results.
So these are the loadings on the gold factor for gold mining
companies.
And these are the loadings on the market factor.
These are the loadings of the technology
stocks and the gold factor.
And these are the loadings of the technology
stocks on the market factor.
Next, let's average the factor loadings for gold mining stocks
and for technology stocks.
What I'm doing in this highlighted table
is I'm averaging the loadings of the gold stocks
on this first gold factor.
And the second number here is the average
of the loadings on the market factor.
Down below, this is the average of the loadings of the tech
stocks on the gold factor.
And this is the average of their loadings on the market factor.
Now, let's think and interpret these results.
First, notice that the loading of gold mining
stocks on the gold risk factor is large and positive.
This should make economic sense because, when the price of gold
goes up, presumably these companies
can generate higher revenue.
And, therefore, investors reward these firms
with higher returns.
For technology stocks, this loading
is negative, which means that, when the prices of gold
go down, on average the returns on technology stocks
go up and vice versa.
The loading of the technology stocks on the market risk
factor is close to 1, which means
that, if the stock market goes up by 1%, on average
the technology stocks go up by 1%, as well.
And the loading of gold mining stocks on the market risk
factor is around 0.2, which means
that they have much lower sensitivity of their returns
with respect to the market risk factor.