
PROFESSOR: Let's compute correlation
between the returns on stock A and stock
B. I will start with the covariance.
So the covariance between returns on stock A and stock
B will be given by this expression.
I got this expression by taking the expression
that we get from the factor model
from the return structure.
So the return on stock A is given by this equation and so
the return for stock B.
The first, so this expected value is not
going to matter because this is just
a scalar and the idiosyncratic component epsilon
is not going to matter here as well for the covariance term
because by definition the covariance between returns
on stock A and B is 0 [NOTE: Professor meant covariance between idiosyncratic components of returns], is just the definition
of idiosyncratic risk.
And there is no correlation between factor returns
and idiosyncratic risk for either of the two stocks.
Again, just by the definition of what is factor return
and what is the idiosyncratic risk.
And so therefore, we are left with the following expressions,
so the covariance of the returns on stock A and B
would be given by just effectively these two
expressions.
So for the first stock we get beta A with respect
to factor 1, multiplied by f1, then the second beta multiplied
by factor 2.
And for stock B we get beta B1 multiplied by f1 and beta B2
multiplied by f2.
Now this covariance in turn is going
to equal to this simple expression for the reason
that again we're assuming that the returns in factor f1 and f2
are uncorrelated, so the covariance is 0.
If it is not, then this expression,
we will have to take into account this covariance as
well.
Again, assuming that this is 0, so what's left
is just simply the variance of f1 multiplied by the factor
loadings of stock A and B on factor 1, so beta A1,
beta B1 multiplied by the variance of f1,
plus the same for the second factor.
So beta A2 times beta B2, multiplied
by the variance of factor f2.
Computing this, again, so we know betas,
we know the variances of factor of f1 and f2.
So this gives us 0.021.
And so this is the covariance.
The final step is take the covariance
and compute the correlation.
Correlation by definition equals to the covariance
of returns on A and B divided by their standard deviations.
We have computed standard deviations
in the first part of this question
so we know these numbers.
So we're taking this covariance that we just
computed, dividing it by the standard deviation
that we computed in part A and this gives me 0.341.
So therefore the correlation between the returns
on stock A and stock B is 34%.
