
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to identify arbitrage opportunities.
in the context of factor models.
We will consider two factor models and three
well-diversified portfolios, A, B, and C with the following
characteristics.
This table gives us expected returns and factor loadings
on the first and second factor for the three portfolios.
We'll construct an arbitrage strategy,
such that generates $1,000 today and has
zero payoff in the future.
We will assume that there is a risk-free instrument.
And the current risk-free rate is 1.5%.
Let us start constructing our arbitrage strategy by assuming
that we buy or go long portfolios A, B,
and C, as well as the risk-free bonds
in the following amounts, XA, XB, XC, and Xrf.
This will be the dollar amount that
was spent on these securities.
We will allow these amounts to be negative,
which would indicate that we are shorting these securities.
So this table summarizes our positions.
So in the last column, I indicate the amounts
that we invest in each of these four securities.
And at the bottom, I put the risk-free bond.
And I put the expected return, which is 1.5%.
And, of course, the factor exposures
on both factors for the risk-free security are zeros.
Recall that we want to construct a trading strategy that
gives us $1,000 today.
So therefore, we can write down the following equation.
So the money that we spend right now
on taking positions in these four securities
should equal to $1,000.
So notice the negative signs on all X's here,
because we assumed that we are buying
all of these four securities.
Now, of course, we can immediately
see that some of these X's have to be negative.
In other words, we have to be shorting
some of these securities.
Otherwise, there is no possibility
that we would earn a positive $1,000.
Now what does arbitrage mean in this particular context?
Number one, it means that our expected returns
from our portfolio will be 0.
Two, it means that we have no exposure to systematic risk.
And three, since we are working with
well-diversified portfolios, which by construction have
no idiosyncratic risk, it means that we do not have exposure
to idiosyncratic risk, because we
are working with three well-diversified portfolios
and with a risk-free bond.
So as long as all of these three conditions are satisfied
and the third one is satisfied by construction,
so as long as the first two are satisfied,
it means we will have arbitrage opportunity in this market.
Let's start with the first condition, zero expected
return.
The equation that is written here indicates that the future
value of our portfolio is $0.00, which means that we are earning
0% expected return.
The first part of this equation for example
XA times 1 plus expected the return on portfolio A,
this is just the future value of portfolio A. Similarly,
XB is the dollar value that we invested in portfolio
B, that is one plan plus expected return portfolio B,
is the future value of this portfolio
and so similarly for portfolio C and similarly
for the risk-free bond.
If we plug-in the numbers that were given in this question,
so we know the expected returns on the three portfolios,
and we know that the risk-free rate is 1.5%,
this gives us this equation.
So this is an equation with four unknowns-- so
our X's, XA, XB, XC, and Xrf.
Now the second arbitrage condition
is that we have no exposure to systematic risk.
In this particular model, we have two systematic risk
factors, 1 and 2.
And so this would mean that we have no exposure
to both of these systematic risk factors.
Technically speaking, it means that the factor loadings
of our portfolio on both of these factors should be 0.
And so this is the first equation.
So the factor loadings of the portfolio P on factor 1 is 0.
We can expand and write this down,
because the beta of the portfolio P
is the weighted average of the betas of the portfolios A, B,
and C here.
Recall that, of course, the beta of the risk-free bond is 0.
So it is 0 here.
With P in this equation, it's just the total value
of the portfolio.
And so, therefore, we have this equation.
So weighted average of the betas of well-diversified portfolio
A, B, and C should equal to 0.
We can see that the total value of portfolio VP cancels out.
So it's irrelevant here.
And so, therefore, we are left with the following equation.
So beta 1 of portfolio A, which is 0.95 multiplied by XA,
plus factor loading of portfolio B on the first factor, which
is 0.85 times XB plus the factor loading of portfolio
C on the first factor 1.2 times XC.
So this should equal to 0.
Similarly, we can write down exactly the same equation
for the second risk factor.
So this is the equation.
So the only thing that changes here,
the fact that all of these betas are the factor loadings
of portfolios A, B, and C on the second risk factor.
And so plugging in the betas of each of these portfolios,
we get this equation.

We now can combine all of the equations into one system.
We have a system of four equations and four unknowns.
The first equation says that we're making $1,000 today.
The second equation says that we have $0.00 and 0% expected
return.
And the third and fourth equation
says that we have no systematic exposure
to the first and second risk factor.
Now, we already learned how to solve
a system of linear equations in Excel, for example.
Refer to recitation number four question 2.
So repeating the same steps, we can solve this
and get the following answer.
So XA is going to be equal to negative $235,480.
XB would equal to $24,360.
XC equals the $169,167.
And Xrf equals to $40,953.
This means that we are going short portfolio A.
And we are buying portfolios B and C
and also buying the risk-free bond.
So this effectively means that portfolio A
had too low of an expected return
given its systematic risk.
And so, therefore, we're shorting that portfolio.
And we're buying portfolios B and C. Importantly,
this illustrates the fact that to avoid arbitrage
opportunities in the market, expected returns
on well-diversified portfolios, and their exposure
to systematic risk should be consistent with one another.
Otherwise, as it's illustrated here,
there will be an arbitrage opportunity.
And this condition that guarantees
no arbitrage in this market is what
gives us the APT pricing equation, which
is a very important result.
