
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
work with a large portfolio of stocks
with the goal to understand what happens to the idiosyncratic,
the risk of a portfolio as the number of stocks
in the portfolio increases.
We will start with a portfolio that consists of 30 stocks.
We will work with in the framework of a two factor
model.
And we have the following factor loadings and standard deviation
of idiosyncratic risk for individual assets for these 30
stocks.
So the factor loading on the first factor, beta 1,
for each of the assets, for each of the 30 stocks, equals to 1.
Now the factor loading on the second factor for these 30
stocks will differ.
So for the first 10 stocks, from i from 1 to 10,
the factor loading will be 1.
For the next 10 stocks, from i equals to 11 to 20,
the vector loading will be 1.6.
And for the remaining 10 stocks from 21 to 30,
the factor loading on the second factor will be 2.1.
This is the idiosyncratic risk of our individual stocks.
For the first 10 stocks, idiosyncratic standard
deviation is 5%.
For the next 10 stocks, from 11 to 20, it's 6%.
And for the remaining 10 stocks, it is 8%.
So first, what we will do here is
that we'll form an equally weighted portfolio out
of these 10 stocks.
And in the first question, we'll try
to understand what are the factor
loadings on factor 1 and 2, in this equally
weighted portfolio.
Let's compute factor loadings of this equally
weighted portfolio.
Let's start with the factor loading 1 or beta 1,
of portfolio p.
By definition, this is just the weighted average
of betas of individual assets in our portfolio.
The weights are the weights of each of the individual assets
in the portfolio.
So all of our w's, would just simply equal to 1 over n1,
where n1 is the number of stocks, 30,
because we're working with equally weighted portfolios.
And so therefore, this expression
becomes just the sum from 1 all the way to 30
to the number of stocks, 1 over n1,
which is the weight of each individual stock, multiplied
by the beta of individual stocks in this portfolio.
Now recall that of beta, all of the loadings,
so if individual stocks on factor 1,
is just simply equal to 1.
So all of this beta i1, they're equal to 1.
And so therefore, the sum becomes just this.
So we're adding up from 1 to 30, 1 over 30.
So this just gives us 1.
And you could see that this is very intuitive
because each individual stock is beta
that it goes to 1 with respect to the first factor.
So for equally weighted portfolio,
for that matter, for any portfolio that we form out
of these assets, the beta, 1, of this portfolio
will always be equal to 1, just because individual assets, all
of them have betas equal to 1.
Now for beta 2 of the portfolio is
going to be a little bit different
because individual stocks have different loadings
on the second factor here.
So let's compute it.
Same expression, this is just definition.
Equally weighted portfolio, so all of our wi's are 1 over n1.
And now we are adding up all of these beta, i2.
So we have 10 stocks for which beta i2 is 1.
So 10 times 1.
The other 10 stocks of which beta 2 is 1.6.
So 10 times 1.6 plus 10 times 2.1.
So this is the beta for the last 30 stocks in this portfolio.
So if we add up all this, we divided by 30.
Again, so this is the number of stocks.
So this expression would equal to 1.57.
So the loading on the second factor of this portfolio p,
equally weighted portfolio, would equal to 1.57.
