
PROFESSOR: As we have seen in the 415Inc.
example in the last lecture, in order
to value the effect of leverage, we
need to know how to value its tax benefit and distress cost.
This requires us to know the proper discount
rates for the corresponding cash flows.
For this purpose, we need to properly specify their risks
or their evolution over time.
We start by introducing some notation.
Let Xt denote the cash flow from the firm's asset
at time t, which is independent of leverage.
Vut denote the value of the firm without leverage at time t.
Vlt denote the value of the firm with leverage at time t.
Dt denote the value of its debt at t,
and Et denote the value of its equity at t.
ra denote the required rate of return
on the firm's asset or the unlevered firm.
rl denote the required rate of return on the levered firm.
rd denote the required rate of return also
the expected interest rate on the firm's debt
when it's levered.
re denote the required rate of return on equity.
Tau denote the firm's tax rate.
We will start with the situation without the tax
shield from debt.
Then MM holds in its benchmark form,
which implies the following.
First, a firm's asset can be viewed simply
as a portfolio of its debt and equity.
That is, V equals D plus E.
Next, asset return equals the weighted average
of the returns of debt and equity, which is the WACC.
That is given by ra equals D divided by D plus E, that's
the weight of debt, times rd, then plus E divided
by D plus E times re, and that's the WACC
as we have defined before.
The value of the firm is then given
by the following equation, V equals D plus E. That equals
the sum from x equal to 1 to infinity, 1 minus tau
times Xs, that's the after-tax cash flow,
divided by 1 plus ra, the asset discount
rate, raised to the power of s.
And this discounted sum of future cash flows
equals Vu, the unlevered firm, which also equals the sum from
s equal to 1 to infinity 1 minus tau times Xs divided
by 1 plus WACC raised to the power of s.
And as we know, that also equals the value of the levered firm.
We also have a MM II, the firm's cost of capital with leverage,
is re equals ra plus D over E, the debt to equity ratio,
times ra minus rd.
In particular, we have ra is independent of D over E,
or leverage.
It is given only by the firm's asset.
re increases with D over E, assuming debt is risk-free.
rd may also increase with D over E as debt becomes risky.