
PROFESSOR: We now add the debt's tax shield into the analysis.
Now MM becomes VL, the value of the levered firm,
equals D plus E equals VU, the value of the unlevered firm,
plus PVTS, the Present Value of Tax Shield minus,
PVDC, the Present Value of Default Cost,
and that, as we know, is the APV, the Adjusted Present
Value.
For simplicity we ignore the cost of default
for the rest of our discussion here,
assuming debt is mostly risk-free.
We can then think of the firm or the project
with leverage in two equivalent ways, which is shown
in the following equation.
VL, the value of levered firm, equals E plus D,
Debt plus Equity, which also equals
VU, the value of the unlevered firm, plus PVTS
and that's the APV.
The first part of the equation expresses it
as a portfolio of debt and equity.
The second part of the equation views it
as a portfolio of two assets.
One is an asset with payoff identical to that
of the project after tax.
The other is an asset with payoff identical to the tax
shield of debt.
In order to value these two cash flows, one from the project
or asset and the other from tax shield,
we need to find their discount rates.
For this we need to specify their time evolution, which
also specifies their risks.
We have discussed this issue when we discussed the link
between risk and the horizon in Capital Budgeting
II in Lecture 16.
In order to stay tractable, we assume
that the firm's leverage ratio remains constant over time.
This is a strong assumption, but not
too far off as a first-order approximation from reality,
as we have seen from the data in Lecture 17.
Constant leverage ratio means that the following two ratios,
that is DT over VLT equals WD, which is the Weight of Debt,
in the total value of the firm.
And ET over VLT, which is WE, that's
the relative Weight of Equity, in a total value of the firm.
These two ratios would stay constant.
This then implies that the required rate of return
on the levered firm is given by rL equals DT over VLT times rD
plus ET over VLT times rE, that is
the weighted average of return on debt and equity,
or written slightly differently, debt
equals wD times rD plus wE times rE.
Next we have 1 plus rL times VLT equals
1 minus tau times Xt plus 1 plus tau times rD times Dt
and plus VLt plus 1.

We can also rewrite this as 1 minus tau times Xt plus 1
plus tau times rD times Dt over VLT times VLT plus VLT plus 1.
Here the left hand side is the gross payoff
from the levered firm and the right hand side
is it's three pieces, after tax cash flow, tax credit,
and the resale value.
We can further rewrite the above as 1 plus rL minus wD times
tau times rD then times VLT equals 1 minus tau times Xt
plus 1 plus VLT plus 1.
From this equation, which is rewritten
as the first equation on top of the slide,
we can define WACC as rL minus wD tau times
rD equals wD times rD plus wE times rE minus wD times tau
times rD, which also equals wD times 1 minus tau times
rD plus wE times rE.
We can then rewrite the first equation on this slide as--
left hand side--
1 plus WACC times VLT equals 1 minus tau times Xt
plus 1 plus VLT plus 1 or VLT equals
1 minus tau times Xt plus VLT plus 1 divided by 1 plus WACC.
We're writing this out.
We have sum from s equal to 1 to infinity
1 minus tau times Xt plus s divided by 1 plus WACC
to the power of s.
Therefore, Including the tax benefit from leverage,
still ignoring the cost of default
and assuming a constant leverage ratio,
we can value a firm or a project in two equivalent ways.
The first is to compute its NPV adjusted for the tax benefit
of debt, that is the APV.
It is given by the first equation on the slide.
VL equals D plus E equals VU plus PVTS.
Writing out, that gives us sum from s equal to 1
to infinity 1 minus tau times Xs divided by 1 plus rA
to the power of s plus PVTS and that is the APV.
The second method is to compute its value
by discounting its after tax cash flow using
WACC adjusted for tax shield.
It leads to the second valuation equation on the slide.
VL equals the sum from s equal to 1
to infinity 1 minus tau times Xs divided
by 1 plus WACC raised to the power of s,
where the WACC is adjusted for tax shield
given by the last equation on the slide, that is WACC equals
wD times 1 minus tau rD plus wE times rE,
which can also be written as D over D
plus E times 1 minus tau times rD plus D over D plus E
times rE.
Both methods, if implemented properly,
will give the right answer.
We will return to their pros and cons
at the end of this lecture.