
PROFESSOR: We now turn to the implementation of the APV
approach.
Suppose that we want to value a project given
its after-tax cash flow.
We need to value its two pieces.
The first piece is the value of its after-tax cash flow.
The second piece is the value of the tax shield
at a desirable leverage level.
We can follow the following steps.
The first step is to find the right discount
rate for the after-tax cash flow from the asset.
We do so by first finding a traded firm
with the same business risk.
Suppose we have the following data, its debt to equity ratio
is D over E. the required rate of return on its equity
and debt, respectively, using CAPM or APT, and then its tax
rate, we can then uncover the required rate
of return on this reference firm's asset,
rA, that is the discount rate without leverage.
Applying rA to the after tax cash flow,
we obtain VU for the project.
We then compute the present value of the debt's tax shield
at a desirable safe debt level.
Finally, we compute the projects APV.
As we can see, the key step in this approach
is to uncover rA from the data on the leveraged firm.
In order to do so, we need to make
several simplifying assumptions.
First, we assume that the pre-tax payout
of the firm or the project grows geometrically,
that is Xt equals Xt minus 1 times gt, where gt is the IID
growth rate with mean g.
As an example, the binomial process
is such a process, where gt takes two possible values.
We also know that, in this case, the risk of payout
compounds over time at a constant rate, which
is more compatible with constant discount rates,
as we discussed in lecture 16.
We're also going to assume the time period is short.
The firm rebalances its debt each period
to maintain a constant debt to equity ratio.
Under these assumptions, the value of the project's asset
is given by the following equation on the slide.
VUt, the value of the unlevered firm at time t,
equals the sum from s equal to 1 to infinity 1 minus tau times
Xt times g to the power of s.
Then divide by 1 plus rA raised to the power of s.
That also equals 1 minus tau times Xt divide by rA minus g.
Therefore, VUt is proportional to Xt.
Moreover, VUt evolves proportionally with Xt.
Now let's consider the firm's asset and liability.
VLt equals Dt plus Et which also equals to VUt plus PVTSt, Where
PVTSt is the present value of the tax shield from leverage
at time t.
We then have the following equation
on the expected return on the firm and its different pieces.
rL which is return on the levered firm,
equals Dt divided by VLt, the relative weight of debt,
times rD plus Et divide by VLt, the relative weight of equity,
times rE.
This can also be written as VUt divided
by VUt plus PVTSt times rA plus PVTSt divided by VUt plus PVTSt
times rTS, where rTS is the expected rate of return
on PVTS.

A critical observation at this point
is that because constant debt to equity ratio, the risk of PVTS
is virtually the same as the risk of the firm's asset value,
VUt, if time period is short, that is rTS equals rA.
This greatly simplifies the valuation of tax shield.
For the same reason, PVTS and the firm's asset
also have the same beta.
Beta TS equals beta A.
Given the results above, we then have
rL equals Dt divide by VLt times rD plus Et divided
by VLt times rE, which equals wD times rD plus wE
times rE, which equals rA.
The required rate of return on equity
for the levered firm as stated in MM II with taxes is rE
equals rA plus D over E times rA minus rD.
Under CAPM, we even have that beta of L equals wD times beta
D plus wE times beta E, which also equals the beta of A.
Is important to know that this relationship is
the same as what we obtained previously
under the assumption of no tax shield from leverage.
But here the tax shield from leverage is included.
The formula still holds.
This is because under the stated assumptions,
the risk of tax shield generated by debt
has the same risk as the firm's asset.