
PROFESSOR: Our discussion above clearly
shows that in the presence of frictions, such as taxes
and distress cost, investment and financing become connected.
In valuing a project, not only do
we need to consider the NPV of its asset,
we also need to take into account
the debt capacity of the asset, and the value of the benefits
and costs from leverage.
Therefore, in general, we should consider a firm's investment
and financing decisions jointly.
In doing so, we have developed two approaches.
One is the APV approach and the other is the WACC approach.
In the example discussed last, we
have seen how each of the two approaches
can be implemented to make the investment and financing
decision together.
If done properly, the two approaches
lead to the same answer.
Before concluding, we would like to say a few words
about the pros and cons of these two approaches.
We start with WACC, as it's pretty well-known.
The WACC approach has several advantages.
First, it's fairly widely used.
Second, it requires fewer computations
if we have the right inputs.
Third, it seems more straightforward and intuitive
to understand and explain.
But really, as we have seen, it's actually not that obvious
as we think more about it.
WACC has some serious drawbacks.
First, it mixes the effects of asset and liability.
Errors and approximations in the liability effect
will contaminate valuation, especially
the valuation of asset.
Second, it is in some sense artificially constructed,
and hence, not very flexible.
It is harder to be adapted to more complex situations,
such as nonconstant debt ratios, cost
of hybrid securities like convertibles,
other effects of financing, like the cost of distress,
and personal taxes.
Let's now look at APV.
It has several clear advantages.
First, it's clear on where value comes from--
asset, tax shield, and cost of distress.
There's no mix between different effects.
And hence, there's no cross-contamination
in errors and approximations.
Third, it's more flexible.
Different effects can be added as separate items.

APV's main disadvantage, if there is one,
is that it's not widely used yet.
But both conceptually and operationally,
it is the right approach, and should
be followed whenever possible.

Overall, for complex, changing, or highly levered capital
structure like LBOs, APV is much better.
Under the right circumstances, it
does not matter which method is used, if done correctly.