
PROFESSOR: We will now introduce our main result, portfolio
diversification.
First, let's look at an example before we take a deeper dive
into the analytics.
Consider a portfolio of two securities.
This time we are going to look at two individual stocks, IBM
and Intel.
These are both large technology stocks.
We form a portfolio with equal investments
in these two securities.
When we compare the volatilities of individual investments
on IBM and Intel to that of the portfolio,
we see that the volatility of portfolio returns
is lower than either of the two volatilities.
By combining these two securities
into a single portfolio, we are able to reduce risk.
It is now lower than it would have
been for any one of these two as individual investments.
This is an example of all one can
achieve by diversifying risk.
It is intuitive why the risk of the portfolio
may be relatively low.
These two stocks, IBM and Intel, are different companies
with their own firm-specific risks.
They have a lot in common.
They are both technology stocks.
They're both exposed to macroeconomic news.
But they also have individual components.
By combining them into the portfolio,
we are able to reduce the impact of individual firm-specific
risk.
When one of these stocks is up for idiosyncratic reasons,
the other one may be down.
This kind of consolidation is what
enables us to reduce the portfolio risk.
More formally, we will see that a reduction in portfolio risk
is based on the covariance of returns between the two assets.
The following graph illustrates the concept of diversification.
We start with two securities with identical volatilities,
35% in this case.
We make several alternative assumptions
about the degree of correlation between the two assets.
One extreme case will be when the correlation
is perfect, equal to 1.
Most of the time correlation is imperfect,
so we look at a few alternative values, 0.5, 0,
and even a negative number, minus 0.5.
What we see is that as the correlation between the two
securities declines, the volatility of the portfolio
gets progressively lower.
This illustrates the power of diversification.
The case of the negative correlation of 0.5
leads to the largest reduction in risk
through diversification.
Now, let's step back and think a bit
about the limits of diversification as a tool.
What can we hope to achieve?
Some of the risks are truly security specific.
And by combining assets into a portfolio,
we can hope to reduce the impact of these risks significantly.
There are certain kinds of risks that are broad,
that affect multiple assets or perhaps the entire market.
These types of risks cannot be eliminated through
diversification.
As a result, there are two types of risks that we can
distinguish, diversifiable--
these are the types of shocks that
can be eliminated or significantly reduced
through diversification by forming portfolios--
and non-diversifiable-- these types of risks
survive portfolio formation.
They are present even in well diversified portfolios
with many assets.
There are several intuitive examples
of important non-diversifiable risks,
for example, business cycle shocks.
They affect multiple businesses in the same direction.
As a result, forming a portfolio of stocks
does not help eliminate exposures
to business cycle shocks.
Inflation shocks are another example.
They affect multiple assets in the same direction.
A spike in inflation is going to affect a portfolio
in the same way it affects individual assets.
Shocks to market liquidity have a similar effect.
Many securities decline in value when
market liquidity deteriorates.
Not all of them do.
As we will see in other classes, there
are exceptions to this rule.
And securities like US Treasuries
tend to move in the opposite direction.
What this tells us is that exposure to the common shocks
largely affects financial assets in the same way.
But not all of them have identical exposures.
It's a relatively nuanced picture.
Nonetheless, it is clear that shocks
like liquidity shocks, inflation shocks, and business cycle
shocks are different in nature from firm-specific risks, which
can be eliminated or reduced by diversification.
Let's take a closer look at the mechanics of diversification.
How does it work?
And what are the limits to what we could
achieve through this process?
Consider an equally-weighted portfolio of n securities.
The covariance matrix of returns has diagonal elements
denoted by sigma ii--
these are the individual variances of asset returns--
and off-diagonal elements, sigma ij,
which give us covariances of returns,
asset i versus asset j.
To compute the variance of the portfolio return,
we need to sum over all of the elements
in the covariance matrix multiplied
by the product of portfolio weights.
In our special case of the equally-weighted portfolio,
all portfolio weights are the same.
They're equal to 1 over n.
What we see as a result is that the variance
of portfolio returns is a sum of the diagonal terms.
Each of them is equal to 1 over n
squared times the variance of asset i's return
and the sum of the off-diagonal elements, which
is the sum of 1 over n squared times sigma ij over all values
of i and j that are not equal to each other.
The key observation here is that in a large matrix,
in a portfolio with many assets, there
are a lot more off-diagonal elements than there
are the diagonal elements.
In fact, in case of n assets in the portfolio,
there are n squared minus n off-diagonal elements.
To put it into perspective, in a portfolio of 100 assets,
there are only 100 diagonal elements.
And there are almost 10,000 off-diagonal elements--
9,900 to be precise.
When we put together all of the terms
in the expression for the portfolio variance,
we can see that the expression separates into two terms.
The first is 1 over n times the average variance
of individual returns.
The second term is very close to the average pair-wise
covariance of returns.
As the number of assets in the portfolio increases,
the first term converges towards 0.
The second term does not disappear.
In fact, it converges to the average covariance of returns.
What this result tells us is that in a well-diversified
portfolio with many assets, variance of portfolio returns
is determined by the average covariance
of individual returns rather than
by their own risk or their own variance.
This tells us where the limit of the diversification is.
By forming a large portfolio with many assets
and diversifying risk, we will be
able to eliminate firm-specific risk, asset-specific risk.
And we will be left with the average covariance, which
captures the contribution of systematic risks, those that
are common to multiple assets.

To gain further intuition, let's plug
in some numbers that are typical for empirical distributions
of asset returns.
On average, a standard deviation of a stock in the US stock
market is close to 10% per month.
A typical number for pair-wise correlations is 40%.
Using our previous expression, we
can then compute the average covariance
of returns in the portfolio.
The covariance is a product of the correlation coefficient
and individual return volatilities.
In our case, this product is equal to 0.004.
That is the average covariance of returns in the portfolio.
As we have shown, the variance of a well-diversified portfolio
is equal to this number, the average covariance of returns,
which tells us that portfolio volatility is close to 6%.

We can see that by starting with individual assets
with 10% return volatility and diversifying,
we are able to eliminate some of the risk.
We reduce portfolio risk to close to 6%.
We're not able to reduce it to 0, because some of the risk
is common to multiple assets.
But we are able to eliminate a significant fraction of risk
from the portfolio.
What if correlation was different?
What if it was equal to 1 or 0?
In this case, you would find different limits
to diversification.
As you can see from the graph, in the case
of perfect correlation, or equal to 1,
diversification does not reduce portfolio risk.
This is very intuitive.
Correlation equal to 1 means that all assets move together
in unison.
There is no benefit in combining them into a portfolio.
We cannot reduce the risk.
Correlation equal to 0 gives us more room to diversify.
0 correlation means that the covariance of returns
on any pair of assets is 0.
And that tells us that in a limit, when
the number of assets goes to infinity,
the variance of portfolio returns will converge to 0.
In this case, we can eliminate all of the risk in the limit
as the portfolio grows in the number of assets.
The curve in the middle is the case that we just explored,
average correlation equal to 0.4.
You can see that in this case, some of the portfolio risk
can be eliminated through diversification.
And some of it is left.
Whatever is left is what we call systematic non-diversifiable
risk.
Another lesson from this graph is
that it doesn't take many assets to reduce risk of the portfolio
significantly.
Starting from a single investment
and moving to 4 or 10 or 20 assets in the portfolio,
we can realize most of the benefits of diversification.
Going past 50 or 100 assets has little additional benefit.