
PROFESSOR: In this class, we're going
to talk about fundamental concepts, risk and return.
These are at the core of financial models
and decision-making.
Managing and measuring risk is the kind of problem
that shows up in many contexts.
For example, think about an investor saving for retirement.
One can adopt a safer strategy providing
a higher likelihood of reaching a target, but a lower upside.
Or an investor can pursue a riskier strategy--
invest more in equities, for example--
providing higher likelihood of an upside
but also a higher chance of falling short.
A hedge fund needs to decide how to allocate capital
across multiple investment strategies.
This depends on the risk of individual strategies, which
has to be measured and managed, as well as
the joint distribution of returns on multiple strategies.
An insurance company which sells multiple types of products--
life insurance, casualty insurance--
has to decide how to model the joint distribution of risk.
How do you quantify the risk at the firm level?
Is it the case that individual insurance contracts
are roughly independent and the risk can be diversified?
Or is there a common component which
is going to translate into firm-level risk?
A sovereign wealth fund, when formulating an investment
strategy, needs to be aware of how financial risks are
related to the underlying risks of the country's economy.
All of these problems are examples of risk measurement
and risk management.
In order to make decisions under uncertainty,
we need an analytical, mathematical framework.
In this class, we're going to introduce the Expected Utility
Theory.
This theory quantifies decision-making and the risk
and can be used as a basis of portfolio choice in particular.
We are going to develop analytical tools
for quantifying risk, for measuring it,
and apply them to investment decisions.
This all comes under the broader umbrella
of portfolio analytics.
We will also introduce the concept of diversification.
Diversification is a process of eliminating risks
by pooling investments into a portfolio.
Many call diversification the only remaining free lunch
in financial markets.