
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to identify arbitrage opportunities in the bond
market and how to take advantage of such opportunities.
Suppose that you're a bond trader
and you see the following bonds and their prices
on your screen.
So there are three bonds--
A, B, and C. All three have face value of $100.
They have corresponding maturities
of one, two, and three years, following coupon rates
and prices.
Now there is another bond, bond D, that just became available
in the market.
It has the same face value of $100 as bonds A, B,
and C. It has three years to maturity and a 3% coupon rate.
Its current price is $99.50.
The first question asks us, if there is an arbitrage
opportunity in this market, and if yes
asks us to explain how we would take
advantage of such opportunity.
The first step that we will do in this question
is that we will find the term structure of interest rates
based on the prices of bonds that are given to us.
So in particular, we would use prices
of bonds A, B, and C to find interest rates r1, r2, and r3.
So these are the spot interest rates
for Year 1, Year 2, and Year 3.
We would, generally speaking, follow
exactly the same approach as we've
learned in the first question that we've covered.

So let's start with bond A. The price of bond A is given to us
as $96.90.
So the current price of this bond
because this is a zero coupon bond,
it pays $100 which is its face value at the end of year 1.
So therefore the current price should
equal to the face value discounted
to present at the one-year spot interest rate.
So we have this first equation.
What we do is that we solve this equation
for r1, which gives us one-year spot interest rate, r1.
In this case, it equals to 3.2%.

Now we turn our attention to bond B.
We can write down the following pricing
equation for bond B. The price of Bond B which is given to us
is $99, it should be equal to the first coupon discounted
to present plus the second coupon plus the face value
discounted to present.
Remember, this is a two-year maturity bond.
It pays 2.75% coupon rate.
So therefore the dollar value of the annual coupon
that this bond pays is $2.75.
So we take the first coupon and we're
discounting it to present at one-year spot rate r1.
And we take the second coupon and the face value,
which we get at the end of year two.
And we discount it to present at r2
which is a two-year spot rate.
So the goal is to solve this equation for r2.
Glancing at this equation, it looks
like we have r1 and r2 in this equation.
But the good news is that we already
know r1, which we found from the price of bond A which was 3.2%.
So therefore we can plug this r1 into the above equation
and use it to solve for r2.
Solving that equation for r2 gives us 3.28%.
So this is year-two spot rate.
So to recap what we've done so far,
we've found one-year spot rate which is 3.2%,
we found year-two spot rate which is 3.28%.
Now the final step is to take the price of bond C
which is a three-year zero-coupon bond currently
traded at $88.55.
And based on this equation, we will find year three spot
rate or r3.
So the good news is that this equation is fairly simple.
In the sense that this is a zero-coupon bond.
So there are no intermediate coupons
that this bond pays in Year 1 and Year 2.
We've covered a situation like this in Question 1.
So here, just for simplicity, we've
given you a zero-coupon bond.
So solving this equation for r3 becomes fairly easy.
If we solve it, we get r3 that equals to 4.14%.
So what we've found so far is that we
found the term structure of interest rates
for the first three years, for Year 1, 2, and 3.
So Year 1 interest rate equals the 3.2%.
Year 2 interest rate equals to 3.28%.
And Year 3 interest rate equals to 4.14%.
Now let's examine whether bond D is priced fairly
given the current term structure of interest rates.
That, of course, assumes that bonds
A, B, and C are fairly priced.

So recall that bond D is, again, so it
has three years to maturity.
It has 3% coupon rate.
So therefore it pays $3 coupon at the end of Year 1,
$3 coupon at the end of Year 2, $3 coupon at the end of Year 3,
plus the face value of $100 that it also
pays at the end of Year 3.
So therefore, we can write down the following equation.
So we're taking the first coupon,
discounting it to present at Year 1 interest rate,
spot rate, which is 3.2%.
We take the second coupon, which is again $3
and we are discounting it to present at the Year 2 spot
rate which is 3.28%.
And the last payment of 3 plus $100, we're
discounting at Year 3 spot interest rate of 4.14%.
So if you compute this, it gives us the price of $96.93.
But recall that the quoted price of this bond was $99.50.
So therefore, bond D appears to be overpriced, overpriced
relative to its fair price.
And therefore this presents an arbitrage opportunity.
So to take advantage of this arbitrage opportunity, what
we should do are generally two things.
So we either sell an overpriced bond
or we buy the underpriced bond, or any asset for that matter.
In this case, since bond D was overpriced,
to take advantage of this opportunity we should be
selling this bond at the quoted price or at $99.50.
