
PROFESSOR: In this question, I will teach you
how to find the price of a bond from a given
yield to maturity, or YTM.
Let's consider the following bond.
It has five years until maturity.
It has face value of $100.
The coupon rate is 4.5%, and this bond pays annual coupons.
And the yield to maturity on this bond right now is 3.15%.
So given this information, the goal
is to find the price of this bond.
Now, if we're given YTM on any given bond, to find its price,
all we have to do is we have to take all of the cash flows
that this bond produces and discount them to present
using yield to maturity.
And this is exactly what I will do in this question.
So here, I have the cash flows that we
get from holding this bond.
I draw a timeline this way, and so the first payments
in year one--
or precisely at the end of year one-- we get is $4.50.
This is the coupon rate multiplied
by the face value of this bond, so $100 times 4.5%.
This is $4.50.
This is how much this bond pays to us at the end of year one.
At the end of year two, we get exactly the same payments,
so $4.50--
at the end of year three, third coupon, same exact dollar
value--
at the end of year four, another $4.50.
Now, at the end of year five, we'll get our last coupon,
$4.50, plus we get the face value, $100,
paid to us when this bond matures at the end of year
five.
Now, we're taking all of these cash flows from this bond
and we're discounting them to present using YTM.
In this equation, it is represented by letter y.
So the first payment we're discounting
to present by 1 plus y.
The second one, because it occurs at the end of year two,
is 1 plus y squared, 1 plus y raised to the power of 3,
and so forth.
The very last payment--
1 plus y raised to the power of 5.
So the only thing we have to do here
is that we have to plug in this YTM,
or this y, which is 3.15% into this equation
and find each of these individual ratios, add them up,
and this will give us the price of this bond.
Now, what I have done here is I've plugged in this y
into this equation and computed the bond price.
So the bond price is $106.16.
So this is how we find the bond price
from given yield to maturity.
In the next question, what I will teach
you is I will give you the bonds with a given bond price
and I will ask you to do the converse calculation.
So from given price, we will learn how to compute yield
to maturity on a given bond.
Now, let's discuss very important irregularity here.
So notice the relationship between the face
value of these bonds, which is $100,
and its price, which is $106.
The price is higher than the face value.
In this question, this happens because the coupon rate
on this bond, 4.5%, is higher than the yield
to maturity, which is 3.15%.
In this case, we are saying that this bond
is priced at a premium because coupon rate is higher
than the yield to maturity.
If the yield to maturity was the same as the coupon rate,
so let's say that yield to maturity in this question
is 4.5%.
We will find that the price of this bond
equals to $100, in which case, we say that this bond is priced
at par.
Now, conversely, if yield to maturity
here was higher than the coupon rate of 4.5%, what
we would have found in this question
is that the bond price would be less than the face
value of this bond.
So it would be less than $100, in which case, we
say that these bonds would have been priced at a discount.
This happens, again, when the coupon rate
is lower than the yield to maturity on this bond.