
PROFESSOR: Let's compute the actual change
in value of our liabilities.
So the new yield curve right now is flat at 5.2%.
So all we need to do here is that we
need to take this new yield and compute
the current present value of the liabilities of this pension
fund.
So this is the same expression as we had before,
when the yield curve was at 5%.
So right now, the only difference
here is that we're using the new yield of 5.2%.
If we compute this present value of liabilities,
we will find that the value is $97.25 million.
So therefore, the actual decrease in value
is what it was before.
And before, the value was $100.21 million.
And the current value is $97.25.
So the actual decrease in value is $2.96 million.
This is by how much the present value of our liabilities
dropped as a result of the increase in the yield,
or, again, the parallel shift in the yield curve.

So let's summarize.
When we used the modified duration
and we found the approximate change
in the value of our liabilities, the answer
was that it decreased by $3 million.
Now, when we compute the actual decrease,
the actual decrease was $2.96 million.
So it's actually less than what was approximated
by the modified duration.
Now, the first thing to note here
is that apparently, modified duration actually worked
really well to give us the approximate change in the value
of our liabilities.
So the only difference here is $0.04 million.
But now, let's start to understand
why the actual value decreases less than what duration
approximation gives us.
Let's look at this chart, and the answer
will be that this is due to the convexity of the bond prices,
the function of the yield.
So let's look at the right part of this picture,
so this is where the yield increase.
So if you look at, for example, just hypothetically speaking
on this picture.
So let's say that the yield changed from 5% to 7%.
So based on this picture, so the blue line here
is the duration approximation.
By how much, if we are going to use modified duration,
what would be the decrease in the value of our holdings as
implied by the duration?
And the red line is the actual--
is the actual price of the bond.
And you could see that due to the convexity,
that the actual decrease in the value of these liabilities
would actually be lower than what it would have been
if we just used the modified duration
to approximate that change.
And this is precisely what we found in this question.