
PROFESSOR: Let's compute convexity of this bond.
I will start with definition.
So convexity of the bond is given
by 1/2 multiplied by the inverse price, multiplied
by the second derivative of the bond price with respect to YTM.
So what I'm going to do right now,
I will try to expand this formula
by taking the second derivative of the bond price
with respect to YTM.
So let's write down the bond price as this.
So this is just the present value of cash flows
that we get from the bond discount
at the present at its YTM.
I will take the first derivative,
which would be given by the following expression.

Now we'll take the second derivative, which would
be given by this expression.
I will write it down slightly differently
by factoring out 1 over 1 plus YTM squared.
So that under the summation sign we
will get the following expression.
And now I will plug in this derivative
into the definition of the convexity.
And so I'm going to get 1/2 multiplied
by the inverse price, multiplied by 1 over 1 plus yield squared,
multiplied by the following sum.
Within this following sum, what I
will do is that I will write down
the ratio of cash flow received in the year t,
divided by 1 plus YTM, raised to the power t
as the present value of this cash flow.
So this is why I factored out 1 plus y squared,
so that I can actually write down
this as the present value of this cash flow.
And so therefore under this summation sign,
we're going to have the present value of cash flow in the year
t multiplied by year t multiplied by year t plus 1.
And so this is the expression that we
can use right now to compute the convexity of the bond
that we have in this question.
This is a similar spreadsheet that we
had in part A of this question.
So here we are given our current YTM, the face
value of the bond, the coupon, the cash
flows that we get from the bond.
And we've already found the price
of this bond, which was 106.77.
So right now let's use this expression
which is derived to compute the convexity of this bond.
So first, for each year 1 through 5,
I will compute this expression that we
have under the summation sign.
So this is the present value of each
of these cash flows multiplied by t
and multiplied by t plus 1.
So for year 1, I will take the present value
that we compute it here.
I will multiply it by year, 1 in this case,
and multiply it by 1 plus another 1.
And I will do this calculation for each of these payments.
And then I will add it up.
And so you can see that to compute the convexity,
I need to take 1/2.
I need to divide it by the price of the bond,
and I need to divide it by 1 plus y squared.
And so first I will take the sum of these terms.
And then I will divide it by 2, I
will multiply it by the price.
And then we'll multiply it by 1 plus YTM squared.
And so this would exactly be the convexity of this bond.
So the convexity will be 12.38.
