
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn about interest rate risk.
Suppose that you manage a pension
fund and your liabilities consist of the following three
payments.
10 years from now, you have to make a payment of $40 million.
In 15 years from now, you have to make
another payment of $75 million.
And in 20 years from now, you have
to make a payment of $105 million.
This is an approximation how actual pension funds work.
Usually pension funds have to distribute pension payments
to a rate that is obviously more frequently
than every five years.
So this is just an approximation how a regular pension
fund works.
But you will see that the tools that we'll
learn in this question can be extended
to a more realistic scenario.
We will assume that the term structure of interest rates
is flat at 5%.
Part A of the question asks us to use modified duration
to determine what happens to the present value of liabilities
of this pension fund when interest rates increase
by 0.2%.
And in part B of the question, we'll
compute the actual change in the present value of liabilities
of the pension fund again when interest rates increase
by 0.2%.
To compute the modified duration of the liabilities
of this pension fund, let's first
start by computing its Macaulay duration.
By definition, the Macaulay duration
is given by this expression.
So this is the same expression as we've
seen in the previous question.
So let's first compute the present value
of the liabilities of this pension fund so that's our p.
So in other words, let's compute the present value
of all the future liabilities of this pension fund.
So this is given by this expression.
So we have to make our first payment of 40 million dollars
in the year 10.
So the present value of there is 40 divided by 1 plus 5.
5 is our current yield to maturity.
raised to the power of 10 because this payment
occurs in the year 10.
Plus $75 million dollars.
This is our second payment that occurs in year 15.
And finally $105 million is our last and third payment
that occurs in year 20.
So we're discounting it to present again
at 5% interest rate.
And we're raising it to power 20 again because this cash
flow occurs in the year 20.
So this gives us the present value
or the value of the future, the present value
of the future liabilities of this pension fund
which is $100.21 million.
Now the Macaulay duration, again,
is given by this equation.
So we've computed p, the price.
So now we can compute the remaining term.
So this sum term, which here consists of just three
turns because we have three liability payments.
So 1 divided by 100.21, this is one
divided by the price or the present value
of our liabilities multiplied by 40 divided by 1
plus 5% raised to the power of 10,
so this is the present value of the first liability
payment multiplied by 10.
So this is the year when this payment occurs.
Plus 75 divided by 1 plus 5% raised to the power of 15,
again this is the present value of the second payment
multiplied by 15.
This is the year when it occurs.
Plus 105 or divided by 5% raised to the power of 20 times 20.
Because that payment occurs in the year 20.
So when we compute this, the Macaulay duration
of our liabilities is 15.75 years.
Now the modified duration by definition
is just Macaulay duration divided by 1 plus yield.
So in our case, this would be 15.75 divided by 1 plus 5%.
And this will give us exactly 15.
So the modified duration of our liabilities of this pension
fund is just 15.
Now what we want to do right now is
that we want to use this modified duration
to approximate the change in value of our liabilities
when a yield curve shifts.
So to be precise technically speaking,
when is it going to be a parallel shift in the yield
curve.

The value, the change in the value of our liabilities,
can be approximated using the following equation.
So the change in the value, this is
delta P would equal to the original value
of our liabilities times the modified duration
times the change in the yield.
And this goes with the negative sign because the value--
the price of the bond or the value of the bond and yields
change in the opposite direction.
So if yields increase the value of bonds will decrease.
And so this is what will happen in our case.
So now let's use the numbers that we have in this question
so the assumption is that the yield curve shifts up by 0.2%.
So therefore the value of our holdings
will change by this much.
So we are taking the original $121 million,
we're multiplying it by the modified duration which is 15.
And we're multiplying it by the change
in the yield, which is 0.2%.
And this gives us negative $3 million.
So as yield increases by 0.2%, the value of our liabilities
drops by 3 million dollars.
And this answer is given to us by using this approximation
in which we're using the modified duration to compute
the approximate change in the value of our liabilities.