
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to compute duration for different types of bonds.
Assume that the yield curve is flat at 2%.
Compute the Macaulay duration and modified duration
for the following bonds.
Bond A is a zero-coupon $100 face value
bond maturing in 20 years.
Bond B is a 5% coupon, $100 face value perpetual bond.
We will assume that the coupons are paid annually.
And C is a 5% coupon bond with $100 face
value maturing in 20 years.
We will also assume that the coupons are paid annually.

Let's start with question a.
And compute the duration for a zero coupon bond
that matures in 20 years.
Let's start with Macaulay duration.
So by definition, Macaulay duration
is given by the following expression.
So it's 1 divided by the price of the bond multiplied
by the sum where we take each of cash
flows that the bond pays in year, in years T and divide it
by 1 plus yield raised to the power of t multiplied
by the period in which this cash flow was paid, so year t.

For zero-coupon bond, all of the cash
flows except for the very terminal cash flows are zero.
So in this case, cash flows in year small t,
where small t is equal or less than capital T would
be zero and cash flow in year cap T is $100.
So therefore, the Macaulay duration expression,
the whole sum, would be just consisting of one term.
This is the terminal term.
So we get 1 over P multiplied by $100 divided
by 1 plus yield raised to the power of capital T multiplied
by capital T. So this is the terminal year
in which the only payment that this bond pays actually occurs.
So now, notice that the price of the bond for a zero-coupon bond
is given by just simply $100 divided by 1 plus yield raised
to the power of capital T. And so what I will do right now
is that I will plug in this price equation
into the duration equation.
And so you could see that, that would just
equal to 1 over P multiplied by P and multiplied by capital T.
And so that would just give us capital T.
So therefore for a zero-coupon bond,
the Macaulay duration would always
equal to the maturity of the bond.
And this is a very important property for zero-coupon bonds.
So in this particular case, since our bond
has 20 years to maturity, the Macaulay duration
for this bond in part A of this question equals to 20 years.

Now the next step is to find the modified duration, which
by definition is the Macaulay duration divided
by 1 plus y, which is again yield to maturity on this bond.

The modified duration of this bond
then is given simply by taking 20, which is the Macaulay
duration, divided by 1 plus 2%.
And this gives us 19.61%.
So to summarize, the Macaulay duration
for this bond is 20 and the modified duration is 19.61%.
