
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to compute bond convexity
and we'll learn how to use it to approximate the change
in the value of our holdings or in the value of the bond.
So assume that the yield curve is flat at 3.5%.
We will assume that there is $100 face value
bond that pays annual coupons and has five years to maturity.
The coupon rate is 5%.
So first we will compute the modified duration of this bond.
Second we will compute its convexity,
then we will use modified duration of this bond
to try to find the approximate change in the value
of the bonds when interest rates drop or the yield curve
drops by 1.5%.
This is exactly what we have done in question 6.
Then we will actually use convexity,
the one that we'll compute in part B of this question
to find the approximate change in the value of the bond
when interest rates drop by the same 1.5%.
And then in the last part we'll compute the actual change
in the value of the bond and then
we will compare that actual change to parts C and D
of the question and see how well both parts C
and D approximate the actual change
in the value of this bond.
Let's start by computing the modified duration of this bond.
So this is very similar to what we have done in question 5
and the spreadsheet has the same template.
The only difference is that this bond
has five years to maturity.
So the YTM on this bond, the current YTM, is 3.5%,
its face value is $100 and this bond pays 5% annual coupon.
So here we have the cash flows that we get from this bond
and the first step what I will do
is that I need to compute its price.
So I will compute the present value of this cash flow.
So we've already done this calculation several times.

And so if I compute present value for each of these five
payments, I add them up.

This will be the price of the bond.
Again, I always recommend making sure that the price of the bond
makes sense.
So in this case, we expect this bond to be priced at a premium
because the coupon rate of this bond is higher than its yield
to maturity.
And so the price of the bond, 106
is above the face value of $100, so this makes sense.
So now the next step I will compute the present value
of each of these individual payments
and multiply it by the year in which it occurs.

I will add them up as well.
And then I will compute the Macaulay duration
by taking the sum and dividing by the price of the bond.
And so this would be the Mcaulay duration of this bond.
So it's 4.56%.
Again, recall the other check is that we expect the Mcaulay
duration here because this is a coupon paying bond,
we expect the Mcaulay duration to be lower
than the maturity of the bond.
So the maturity of this bond is five years,
the Mcaulay duration is 4.56.
And finally, the modified duration
is just the Macaulay duration divided
by 1 plus the current yield.
So the answer here will be that the modified duration is 4.41.
