PROFESSOR: In this question, I will teach you
how to find spot interest rates from given bond prices.
In this question we're given three bonds--
Bond A, Bond B, and Bond C. Bond A has 0% coupon
and has one year until it matures.
Bond B has a 3% coupon rate and has two years until it matures.
And bond C has a 3.5% coupon rate
and has three years until maturity.
Bond prices are given as such.
So Bond A costs $97.60 right now.
Bond B costs $96.
And Bond C costs $98.
So the goal is to take this information
about the bonds in green here and find spot interest
rates for Years 1, 2, and 3.
So this is the question.
The first step that we'll do here
is that we will write the prices of these bonds
as the function of interest rates.
So let's start with bond A.
So the price of Bond A, PA would equal to $1 face value
that this bond pays at the end of Year 1 divided
by 1 plus interest rate r1.
So this is the one-year spot interest rate.
One thing to know here is that all of the bonds
have $100 face value.
And all of these bonds are risk free.
So we are talking about spot interest rates, risk-free spot
interest rates.
So this is for bond A.
The next step is to write the price
as the function of the coupon and interest rates for bond B.
So Bond B has two years until maturity and pays 3% coupon.
This means that if we are the holder of this bond
we will get $3 at the end of year one, which
is our first coupon.
We'll get $3 at the end of year two, which
is our second coupon.
And then we will get the face value of $100 paid
to us at the end of year two.
So now what we do is we're discounting these coupon
payments and the face value to present using
the appropriate discount rates.
So the first $3 we get at the end of Year 1.
So therefore we're discounting it by discount rate r1.
And the second payment, the last coupon in the face value,
we're getting at the end of Year 2.
And therefore, we're discounting it to present.
We're using r2 as the discount rate.
Hence power of 2 here because this payment
comes at the end of Year 2.
The final step is to do the same thing for Bond C.
So the price of Bond C, this bond has three years
until maturity, base coupon 3.5%, so 3.5 dollars
discounted by 1 plus r1.
So this is our first payment.
Our second payment is the next coupon $3.50 discounted
to present at discount rate r2 raised to the power of 2
because this payment occurs in Year 2.
And finally we get our last coupon
at the end of year three.
We get face value of this bond as well at the end Year 3.
And we're discounting it to present
using r3 as a discount rate.
And we're raising it the power of 3
because this payment occurs at the end of Year 3.
Now the goal is to find spot interest rates r1, r2, and r3.
I've written down the prices of these bonds right here.
So they are given to us.
So what we effectively have here is
that we have a system of three equations with three unknowns.
And notice that this is an easy system to solve in the sense
that the first equation has only one unknown, r1.
So we can solve this equation, plug this r1
into the second equation, at which point
this ratio will become known.
And this will just become an equation with one unknown, r2.
At which point we can solve this equation for r2,
plug our known r1 and r2 into the last equation,
and solve this last equation for r3.
And so this is exactly what I'm going to do now.
So I'm going to start solving the first equation for r1.
So r1 is going to be equal to $100 divided by $97.50 minus 1.
So this would give me the first spot interest rate, r1.
So I solved this first equation for the first spot interest
rate, r1.
And the answer is r1 equals to 2.56%.
Now the next step is to take this known r1
and put it into the second equation.
I've erased the third equation here right now so that I
have more space to work here.
So what I will do here is that I will plug this
into this equation.
And I will get the following.
So I'll get 96 equals to $3 divided by 1
plus 2.56% plus 103 divided by 1 plus r2 raised to power of 2.
This is a known number that we can compute.
And so this just becomes an equation
with one unknown, which I can solve for r2.

I just solved this equation for r2.
So r2 equals to 5.2%.
Now the last step is to find r3.
So I've written down back the bond pricing
equation that we had before for Bond C.
And so right now what I will do is
that I will take again r1 that we computed before
and I will put it down here.
And I will also do the new r2 that we found.
And I'll put it into this last equation
as well, at which point again this will become just one
equation with one unknown.
So let's do it.
So $98 equals to 3 and 1/2, 1 plus 2.56% plus another 3.5,
that's our second coupon, divided by 1 plus 5.2%
squared plus 103.5 Divided by 1 plus r3 raised to power of 3.
So this we can compute.
This we can compute.
And again, this just becomes one equation with one unknown.
So the goal right now is to solve this equation for r3.
So I just solved this equation for r3
and I found that r3 equals to 4.22%.
And that's how we find spot interest rates.
So r1 equals to 2.56%.
r2 equals to 5.2%.
And r3 equals to 4.22%.
This is the answer to this question.
So this is how we find from given bond prices.
This is how we find spot interest rates.
When we start with finding the closest or the shortest
interest rate from the first given bond and then
we continue working and finding the second
and the third interest rate.
So if we're given a fourth bond and we were given four periods,
we would continue doing that, and just solving this equation
and stripping these spot interest rates.
Now the last step what I will show
is that I want to actually use this discount rate
and make sure that I solve this question correctly in the sense
that if I were to price those bonds using this term
structure spot interest rates, that I would actually get
the prices that we were given.
And I will show this to you right now.
So let's compute the prices given the interest
rate that we just found.
So the price of Bond A would equal to,
again, it's a zero-coupon bond, one year to maturity.
So it's $100 divided by 1 plus r1.
So r1 right now equals to 2.56%.
So if we compute this price of this Bond A,
what we will find is that it equals to $97.50.
The price of Bond B would equal to the first coupon,
so $3 divided by 1 plus r1 which is
2.56% plus the last coupon plus the face value
divided by r2 which is 5.2% raised to the power of two
because this cash flow occurs at the end of Year 2.
So if we compute this price right now
with this interest rate, what we will find
is that the price of this bond is indeed
$96, the number that was given to us in this question.
Finally, the bond price C equals to the first coupon payment
3.5 dollars because this bond, again, has 3.5% coupon rate,
divided by 1 plus 2.56%.
This is our r1.
Second coupon, $3.50 divided by 1 plus the second discount
rate, r2, Plus the last coupon payment,
3.5 plus the face value received at the end of Year 3
it's counted by 1 plus r3.
That's 4.22% raised to the power of 3
again because this cash flow occurs at the end of Year 3.
So if we compute this price, we will find
that it also equals to $98.
So what we've done, we've confirmed
that the discount rates that we've found from given bond
prices, if we plug them back in and try
to price those bonds with these discount rates,
it will, indeed, find the numbers or the bond prices that
were given in this question, which means that we have solved
this question correctly.