
PROFESSOR: In this question, I will teach you
how to find yield to maturity.
Consider the following three-year bond.
It pays annual coupon.
It has face value of $100.
And the coupon rate of 5.25%.
The current spot interest rates are as follows.
The one year rate is 1.1%.
The two-year rate is 1.15%.
And the three-year rate is 1.50%.
We will compute yield to maturity on this bond.
The first step in solving this question
is to find the price of the bond.
Now we know how to find the price of the bonds
so we're just taking the term structure of interest rates
that we're given and we're discounting
each of the payments that we're getting from the bond
to present using the term structure of interest rates.
So first, we are taking the first coupon.
So it's $5.25 so recall that this bond pays 5.25% percent
coupon.
And so at the end of year one, we get $5.25.
At the end of year two, we get another $5.25.
At the end of year three, we get the last coupon again $5.25.
And at the same time, we get the face value payment
from the bond.
That's another 100.
And so we're discounting each of these payments using
the corresponding spot rates to present.
And this gives us the price of the bond of $110.98.
Now the second step is to write down the following equation.
So this is definition of yield to maturity.
Yield to maturity is the interest rate
that if we're using it to discount all of the cash flows
that we get from the bond, we get
the current price of the bond.
So therefore, we can write down the following question.
So 110.98-- this is the current price of this bond--
equals to the first coupon discounted
to present at YTM, the second coupon discounted
to present at YTM, plus the last coupon and the face value
discounted to present at the YTM as well.
So now all we have to do is that we
have solve this equation for y.
So this is just one equation with one unknown.
The only problem here is that this equation looks non-linear.
So in principle, this is a cubic equation.
So we have to use a lot of effort
to actually solve this equation for y.
So I'm going to show you how to do this in Excel.
You can also use your calculators
or any other software that solves non-linear equations.
I will show you two different functions
that we can use to find yield to maturity in Excel.
What I have done in the spreadsheet
is I have entered basic information about our bond.
So this face value of $100, the coupon rate of 5.25%, and these
are these spot interest rates which
we used to find the current price of the bond.
So now here, I will use the rate function.
So if you start adding rate, you will
see that this function requires a certain number of inputs.
And these are the inputs that I've put here on top.
So the first input would be the number
of periods, which in the bond speak is
time to maturity of the bond.
So it has three years to maturity
and so therefore it makes three payments.
So this will be our first input.
The second input would be the periodic payment
that our bond makes.
So in our case this is annual coupon rate, which is $5.25.
So this is the second input into this rate function.
The third input is the present value or the current price
of the bond.
Note that it is important to enter the price of the bond
with a negative sign.
So here I have negative 110.98.
So this is my second input.
This is my third input.
So the price of the bond again, it is negative.
And the last input is the face value.
So this is our terminal payment that we
get from this instrument at the end of year three.
So you could see how this function is structured.
So it has the current present value, which is negative.
It has a terminal payment which is the future or face
value which is positive.
It has periodic payments.
This is the second argument in this function
which is positive.
And then the first one is the number of periods.
So if we close this and we hit Enter,
this gives us a yield to maturity
on this bond, which is 1.48%.
Now the second way of solving this equation
is to use internal rate of return function.
So here what I've done is that I'm
showing the cash flows that we get from this bond.
So again, in year zero, we have negative 110.98.
So this is the price of the bond.
So if we are a buyer of this bond,
so this is our negative cash outflow in year zero.
And then we have positive 5.25, positive 5.25,
and positive 105.25.
So another way of computing yield to maturity
is just simply to use Internal Rate of Return function IRR
and then just entering the array of our cash flows.
And simply hitting Enter.
This will give us the identical answer.
So the yield to maturity on this bond is 1.48%.
Now we do not know what internal rate of return is yet.
We will learn this concept later in the course.
But the yield to maturity on the bond
is, in fact, the internal rate of return
if you think of this bond as your investment.
So therefore, we can use both rate function and internal rate
of return.
You could see that the internal rate of return function
is actually much easier to use because all you have to do
is that you have to enter the area of cash flows
that you get from this bond.
But we can use either of the two functions
to find the yield to maturity in Excel.