
PROFESSOR: Let me show you how we can automate solving
this arbitrage question.
The first step that I will do is I will write down
the system of equations that we had in the following matrix
form.
So I'll have matrix A. This is a 4 by 4 matrix.
Then, I will have a column vector of x's.
This is our unknowns, our positions
that we're taking in this corresponding box.
And this would equal to the payoffs
that we get in years 0, 1, 2, and 3.
So you can see that this system of equations written
this way in the matrix form actually gives us
the system of equations that we had before.
Now, we have to solve this for A.
So all we really have to do is that we have to invert matrix A
and then, multiply it by the payoffs vector--
vector b, in this case.
And let me show you how to do this using Excel tools.
You can, of course, do it in any other software
that you are more accustomed to using.
So here, what I've done below is that I
have written down this system, these numbers,
into just Excel arrays.
And what I will do-- so this is my matrix A,
and this is my matrix B. So the goal right
now is to invert these highlighted cells,
and then multiply them by this vector b.
So the first, I will use minverse function that
inverts this 4 by 4 matrix.
To do this, first I have to prehighlight the location
where I want these numbers to be inputted by Excel.
And then, I'm writing the function, so minverse.
And then, I'm selecting array, where this--
where I inputted these numbers.
And then, this is the-- the key here
is to hit the following three keys at the same time,
so I have hit Shift and Control.
So I'm holding Shift and Control right now,
and then I'm hitting Enter.
So this way right now, Excel--
what's it's done, it inverted this matrix.
And so right now, what I have here on the screen
is that it's inverted matrix A.
So now, all I have to do is that I
have to multiply this inverted matrix by vector b.
So here, again, I will prehighlight
because I'm multiplying 4 by 4 matrix by vector 4 by 1.
So the resulting output would be 4 by 1 vector,
and this would be our vector of x's.
So I will use the following function, so mmult.
So this is a multiplication function that multiplies
two arrays of two matrices.
So select the first one, comma, and I will select vector b.
And now, I will also--
so I will hold Shift and Control.
And then, I will hit Enter.
And so this is the answer.
So I'm going to highlight it in yellow.
And you will see that this is exactly the numbers that we've
had before when we were solving this system of equations
by hand.
So again, we're taking long positions in bonds A, B, and C
and we're shorting.
We're selling bond D. So this is how
you solve the system of equations in Excel.
So overall, what we've learned in this question
is that we have learned how to tackle this type of arbitrage
problems.
So all we have to do is that we'll
have to assume that we're taking long positions
in the instruments that we have.
So here we have 4.
If we had 10, we would assume that we
are taking xa, xb, and so forth positions
in all of the 10 instruments.
And then, the keys to construct the payoffs that we get--
$100 in year 0--
and we get $0 payoffs in all of the subsequent years.
And then, what we have to do is that we
have to solve the system of equations,
as we've just done here.
And this way, we would know which positions
and which bonds to take in order to construct
a profitable trading strategy.