
PROFESSOR: In part b, we are given a perpetual bond.
So this bond pays 5% coupon, and it has $100 face value.
Coupons are paid annually.
If you were to measure the stream of cash flows
that you get from this bond, it is $5 paid annually
and it's in perpetuity.
So we will start this question by deriving modified duration.
And then, we'll come back to Macaulay duration.
You will see, because this would be the easiest
to actually derive the modified duration first, and then
go back to Macaulay duration.
So by definition, modified duration
is negative 1 over P multiplied by the derivative of the bond
price with respect to yield to maturity, y.

The price of perpetual bond that pays coupon C
annually is given by this because, again, this is just
a simple perpetuity with a discount rate of y
that pays C, which is the annual coupon payment, every year.
And as we've learned in lecture three,
the present value of this perpetuity
is simply C divided by y.
Now, what we will do is we will first
find the derivative of the price of the bond with respect to y.
And this is very simply just negative C divided by y
squared.
Because, again, the price of the bond was just C divided by y.
And now, we can plug this back into the modified duration
equation.
And this is going to give us minus 1
over P multiplied by minus C divided by y squared.
And so you could see that C cancels out.
y in the numerator and denominator-- one of them
cancels out, and so what is left is just 1 over y.
So therefore, the modified duration for a perpetual bond
is simply just 1 divided by y.
In our case, yield to maturities are 2% this bond.
And so therefore, the modified duration
of this perpetual bond that is given in this question
is just 50.
Notice that it doesn't matter what
coupon rate the perpetual bond actually pays.
So the only thing that modified duration depends on
is just the yield to maturity of the bond.

Now, the Macaulay duration, we can
compute based on the modified duration that we just computed.
Remember that duration of the Macaulay duration
is just modified duration multiplied by 1 plus y.
And we know that the modified duration is 1 over y.
So therefore, the Macaulay duration is just 1
plus y divided by y.
And so therefore, in our case, given that y is 2%,
the Macaulay duration will be just 1 plus 2% divided by 2%.
And that's going to be 51.
So therefore, to summarize this question
is that for this perpetual bond, given
that yield to maturity in this bond is 2%,
its Macaulay duration is 51.
And it's modified duration is 50.