
PROFESSOR: In part c, we're asked
to compute duration of a 5% coupon $100
face value bond that has 20 years to maturity.
Let's start with Macaulay duration.
Again, this is the definition of Macaulay duration written
for this particular bond.
So capital T here is 20.
This is the number of years until the maturity
of this bond.
And since this bond pays annual coupon,
the annual payment that we get from this bond is $5.
So all we need to do here is that we
need to compute the price of this bond and compute this sum.
And this will give us the Macaulay duration.
So we can compute this by hand.
But it's a little bit tedious because we have to--
we have 20 periods.
And for each of the period, we have to compute these numbers.
So what I will do is that I will use
Excel to illustrate how to compute
the duration for this bond.
In this Excel spreadsheet, I have put some basic information
about this bond.
So the current YTM is 2%.
Face value is $100.
Coupon rate is 5%.
So this bond has 20 years to maturity.
So therefore each year it pays $5 coupon up until year 20,
when it pays the last final coupon of $5
plus the face value of 100.
So the first step that I will do here
is that I will compute the price of the bond.
Because if you just look at the, again,
definition of Macaulay duration, we
need to know the price of the bond to compute the duration.
So I will discount each of the individual coupons and cash
flows to present.
Then I will add them up and this will be the price of this bond.
So I'll start with the very first coupon,
so I'll take this $5.
And we'll divide it divided by 1 plus yield
to maturity on this bond.
And I will raise it to power 1 in this case.
This is when this cash flow occurs.
And then I will do this for all of the 20 payments.
And this is the present value of each
of these individual payments that we get from this bond.
So by definition, if I add this up,
so this would be the price of our bond.

So the price of this bond right now is 149.05.
So first notice that it does make sense.
So if we compare the price of this bond relative to its face
value, it's 149 versus 100.
And it does make sense because, again,
so this bond has a much higher coupon
rate, which is 5%, relative to its yield to maturity.
So this bond should be priced at a premium
and its price should be above $100.
So the fact that its 149.05 kind of passes the smell
test in the sense that this bond is indeed priced at a premium.
So now the next step, we need to compute the following sum.
So I've written it down in the second equation
where cash flow in the year t divided by 1 plus yield raised
of the power of t, is just the present value
of that particular cash flow that occurs in the year t.
And then, each of these present value of cash flow in year two,
we have to multiply it by the year
in which this payment occurs.
And then we have to add them up.
So this is how we're going to find
the total value of this sum.
So here is exactly what I will do.
So I'll take the present value that we just
computed for the first payment.
And then we'll multiply it by the year
when this payment occurs.
In this case, it's Year 1.
So you could see that in Year 2, I
will be taking the present value of the second payment
and multiplying them by the year.
When it occurs again, this is a Year 2.
And so I will do it for each of the payments.
And now I will add them all up.
And this would be the sum that we
get in the duration expression.
And now by definition, all we have
to do is to compute the Macaulay duration,
I have to take this sum that they just computed and divide
it by the price of the bond.
And this will, by definition, be the Macaulay duration.
So this is how we can use the spreadsheet
to find the duration of any bond.
So if you have fewer than 20 years,
for example you have two years, three years,
you can do it by hand.
In fact, you should practice to do it
by hand because exam most likely is going
to feature a question where you have to compute the duration
but obviously we're not going to ask
you to compute the duration for, you know, a 20-year bond
because this is too tedious.
But certainly you can do it for a two-year or just a bond
with a shorter maturity.
Now the final step here, what I will do
is that I will compute the modified
duration based on the Macaulay duration
that you just computed.
And modified duration would simply be just,
again, the Macaulay duration divided by 1 plus the yield
to maturity in this bond which is 2%.
And this is 14.15.
So the modified duration for this particular bond is 14.15.
Now notice, going back to Macaulay duration,
notice that this bond has 20 years to maturity.
But its duration is 14.43.
So remember that for bond that pays 0% coupon,
Macaulay duration equals exactly the maturity of the bond.
But for any bond that pays nonzero or positive coupon
the Macaulay duration should be strictly less
than the maturity of the bond.
So in this case, the Macaulay duration
is 14.43 which is less than 20, which again is reasonable
because that number is less than 20.
