
PROFESSOR: Now that we know there is arbitrage opportunity
in this market, I will teach you how
to construct an arbitrage trading strategy that
takes advantage of it.
In particular, we will construct such a strategy
that pays off $100 today and nothing in the future.
I will teach a very universal approach
that you can apply to construct arbitrage
opportunities in any situation.

So we're going to assume that we're
buying xA amount of bond A, xB amount of bond B,
xC amount of bond C, and xD amount of bond D. We will allow
for these amounts for xA, xB, xC, and xD to be negative.
This would imply that we are taking a short position,
we're selling the corresponding bonds.

So we want to construct a strategy that pays--
gives us $100 today.
We can write the following equation.
Bond prices multiplied by our positions
should add up to $100.
Here the key would be that bond prices would
come with negative signs because we're taking--
we're buying these bonds.
So for example, if we're buying one unit of bond A,
we will have to pay right now $96.90.
This is the price of bond A. So in this case,
we'll have a cash outflow of $96.90.
If we are buying two units of bond A,
then our cash outflow would be the price multiplied by 2.
So therefore this gives us the left hand side
of this equation, which means that we're buying xA of bond A,
xB of bond B, xC of bond C, and xD of bond D.
And so this expression gives us our total cash
outflow that we have to spend on buying these bonds.
And so this has to equal to $100 because this
is-- we want a positive cash outflow today
so we want to construct a strategy that gives us $100
today.
So you can immediately see that for this
to work that some of this amounts
xA, xB, and xC, and xD has to be a negative so
that the corresponding cash flow is positive.
So it makes sense that we would have
to take a negative position or short sell one of these bonds.
You could see that it's likely going
to be bond D because we've just determined
in the previous question that this bond is actually
overpriced.

So this is just the summary of this.
Now the key to arbitrage is that our positions should be such
that the bond payoffs or our payoffs from our trading
strategy are zero in all of the subsequent years.
And that is the definition of arbitrage.
So we're making a positive amount today.
So in this particular case, we're going to make $100.
And are positions are fully hatched.
So our cash flows are exactly zero
in all of the subsequent years.
So here because the maximum maturity of the bonds
here is three years so we have to make sure
that in the years 1, 2, and 3 we get $0 cash flows.
Let's start with Year 1.
So recall that bond A is a zero coupon
bond with one year maturity.
So it pays $100 in the year one.
So therefore, the cash inflow or the positive cash
flow because we bought this bond,
so at the end of the year one, we
get $100 times how many units of this bond we purchased,
so times xA.
Now bond B is a 2.75% coupon bond.
And it's a two-year bond.
So it pays us the first coupon at the end of Year 1.
So we get 2.75 times xB.
And bond D, so bond C is a zero coupon bond so it pays nothing.
And it matures in year three.
And bond D, it's a 3% coupon bond
so it pays us for the first coupon $3
at the end of year one.
So hence we get the following expression and this
has to equal to $0 because, again, we
have to ensure that our cash flow at the end of year 1
is exactly 0.

So for Year 2 now bond A pays nothing.
So it pays zero because it already matured.
Now bond B matures actually at the end of year two,
so it pays the second coupon of $2.75.
Plus it pays the face value of $100.
And bond C pays nothing because it's
a zero-coupon bond that matures at the end of year three.
And bond D pays our second coupon.
It pays $3.
So we have the following equation, 102.75 times xB
plus 3 times xD.
And that equals to $0.

So finally for year three, we get-- so at that point in time,
bond A already matured.
So it pays nothing.
Bond B also matured, so it pays nothing.
Bond C pays its face value.
So $100.
And again, recall that this is a 0% coupon bond.
And bond D pays its last coupon which is
$3 plus its face value, $100.
So in year three we get the following equation,
so 100 multiplied by xC plus 103 multiplied by xD.
And that equals to $0.

So let's put this all together.
So we have the following four equations.
So the first equation, it's our cash flow in the year one.
The second equation is our cash flow in the year one.
So the first one is our cash flow in the year zero.
Now, let's put this all together.
We have the following system of four equations
with four unknowns.
These equations represent our cash flows in Years 0, 1, 2,
and 3.
So the goal right now is to solve this system of equations
for xA, xB, and xC, and xD.
So here it's fairly straightforward
how to solve this.
So we can see that, for example, the last two
equations, so the tie--
they had just two unknowns.
So they tie xB and xD.
This is Equation 3.
An xC an xD, this is Equation 4.
So what I'm going to do is that I'm
going to solve the last two equations for xB
as a function of xD and xC as the function of xD.
Now let's look at the second equation.
Second equation has xA, xB, and xD.
So I'm going to plug in the third equation,
or xB into the second equation, and then solve it to express xA
as a function of xD.
So this is me first-step plugging xB
as the function of xD into this second equation.
And then the next step, I'm solving xA for xD.
So I'm solving the second equation.
And so now the second, third, and fourth equation right now
give us xA, xB, and xC as functions of xD.
And so if we plug these expressions
into the first equation, it will give us
just equation with one unknown.
So we'll have only xD in that equation.

So doing that and solving that equation will give us
xD equal to negative 38.85.
So what this means, it means that we are selling,
we are shorting 38.85 units of bond D.
So here I implicitly assume that I can actually
trade fractions of the bond.
So I can buy any fraction.
So in this case, I'm buying 0.85.
So I'm buying 38 whole units and 85 of fraction of bond D.
So now this does make economic sense.
Because we've identified in the first part of this question
is that bond D was overvalued.
It was overpriced.
So it was priced at 99.5.
Well, it's fair price was $96.
So therefore it does make sense for us
to take advantage of this opportunity.
We have to actually sell those bonds at this higher price
and therefore get this higher value to us right now.
And then we're going to be taking long positions
in the other three bonds to make sure
that we get $0 payoffs in the Years 1, 2, and 3.
So now, since we have xD, what we can do
is that we are plugging this amount
xD that we found in the equations that tie xA with xD,
xB with xD, and xC with xD.
And we get the following amounts for xA, xB, and xC.
So xA and xB equal to 1.13, which
means that we are buying 1.13 units of bond A 1.13
units of bond B. And we are buying 40.02 units of bond C.
So we're taking long positions in these bonds.
Now this is our arbitrage strategy.
So we are selling 38.85 units of bond D
and we're buying the corresponding units of bonds
A, B, and C. Now the final step that I want to do here
is that I want to actually verify that this trading
strategy actually works.
So what I will do is that I will plug
in these amounts of xA, xB, xC, and xD that we found
into our equations to make sure that we
get the cash flows that we are thinking that we're getting.
So if I am plugging these numbers
into the first equation, I get $100.
So which means that me buying the corresponding amounts
of bonds A, B, and C, and shorting
the corresponding amounts of bond D gives us exactly $100.
In the Year 1, this equation tells us that we get exactly 0,
as we expect.
In Year 2, we also get 0.
And in Year 3, we also get 0.
So our arbitrage strategy indeed works.
It gives us $100 right now.
And it gives us nothing in the Years 1, 2, and 3.