
PROFESSOR: Let's compute the present value
of growth opportunities of this firm ABC.
Recall that we define the present value
of growth opportunities as the current price.
So this is the price that we just
computed in this question given our investment opportunities
and our investment policy minus what would have happened
if we didn't invest and we just continued status quo
from year 1 onwards.
So if we haven't invested anything
and we paid out all of our earnings
starting from Year 1 as dividends,
our earnings per share would have stayed
constant at $20 level forever.
And this would have been our dividends.
So our dividends per share would have
been $20 starting from Year 1 and continuing onwards.
So therefore, the present value without growth
or without us investing in these new opportunities
would have been just EPS in Year 1 divided by r.
So that's the present value of this perpetuity.
So in our case, this is $117.02.
So this is the price with our current investment
policy minus 20 divided by 12% and this gives us $10.36.
So the current value of ABC's growth opportunities,
of course on a per share basis because this whole calculation
on a per share basis, is $10.36.
In other words, each shareholder here
benefits by increasing his or her share price by $10.36
from this investment policy that this firm undertakes.
Now let us do a very interesting counterfactual analysis here.
What happens if we did not retain any earnings in Year 3
and we would have paid out the entire EPS in Year 3
as dividends?
In other words, what if this number that I
colored in green right now, instead of being 50%
would have been 0%?
What would have happened to our share price?
Would it increase?
Would it stay the same?
Or would it decrease?
The answer depends on, of course,
what is the return on investment that our new investments
generate in this particular year.
And in this case, this is 10%.

Remember that we're discounting our cash flows at 12%
and this is the expected return, this is the risk
that our investors associate with the cash
flows that this company generates.
So therefore, if we are only earning 10% on our investments,
this is below the level of risk that
is assessed by our investors.
So it stands to reason that we are losing value
by investing in projects that generate
the return on investment that is below the expected
return on this stock.
And so in fact if I put 0 here again.
So this would just indicate that instead of reinvesting
we're just paying everything out to shareholders,
we could see that our share price actual increases.
If I put 0 here instead of 177.02,
our current share price would be 178.50.
And then, of course, if we do the same the year before.
So we've reinvested 50% in Year 2
But are ROI is actually very good.
It's 15% relative to the expected return of 12%.
So if I put 0 here, now of course the share price
has to drop because we're not investing in very attractive
investment opportunities.
So let's see what happens if it put 0% here, the share price
drops to $176.19.
To summarize, the optimal investment policy
is to invest in investment opportunities that
have a return on investment or ROI
that is above the expected return of the discount rate
that we're using to discount dividends from this stock.