
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will consider a simple model
of investment and growth.
Let me start by laying out main assumptions.
First, assets don't depreciate.
This means that, even without new investment
the current earnings, or more specifically earnings per share
is going to stay constant at the current level.
Investment at time t starts generating earnings
in year t plus 1.

Investments generate perpetual earnings stream.
And finally, investment opportunities
are characterized by ROI, which is the Return On Investment.
Let me give you a very specific example of an investment
opportunity.
Suppose a firm invests $100 million
into a factory today in Year 0.
Let's say that the return on investments or ROI is 15%.
Then in the case of this firm, this investment
will start producing earnings in Year 1
and these earnings will continue forever.
And these earnings will be $15 million
which you compute as the investment $100 million
multiplied by ROI, which is our return on investment.
So 100 multiply by 15%, this gives us $15 million.
And this is annual perpetual earnings
that this investment generates.

Now let's work with the specific example.
We will consider a firm, let's call it ABC.
The profitability of ABC and its investment policy
are summarized in this table below.
The company is going to have, today, the book value
per share of $100.
Next year, it is expected to generate
earnings per share of $20.
And then the plow-back ratio, which
means the percentage of earnings per share
that the company retains and reinvests,
are given as follows.
So in Year 1, the company plans to retain 80% of earnings
and reinvest.
So that's our plow-back ratio.
In year 2 and 3, 50%.
And then they don't plan to retain any of the earnings.
They plan to pay them all out in the form of dividend.
And finally the last row indicates the return
on investments this company will generate on these new earnings.
So in Year 1, it's 20%, then 15%, then 10%.
And then it is going to continue at 10% forever.
We will assume that the appropriate discount
rate in this question is 12%.
Let's look at the relationship between the key variables.
I will denote by B sub t, the plow-back ratio
of the company in the year t.
Investment, as I denote here by I in the year t
would be the fraction of earnings per share
that we retain.
So this will be also investment per share.
So earnings per share multiplied by the plow-back ratio,
this will be our investments in the year t.
The next year's earnings per share, EPS and t plus 1,
would be this year's Earnings Per Share, EPS
in year t plus ROI, this is the profitability
of our investments multiplied by the amount that we reinvested,
I.
The book value per share will be the prior year's book
value per share plus this new investments
that we made this year.
And finally, dividends would be the part of EPS
that would be in retained so we pay it out to shareholders
in the form of dividend.
So more specifically it is EPS in year t multiplied
by 1 minus plow-back ratio b.
Recall that 1 minus b is the payout ratio that we sometimes
denote as small p.
This is the fraction of the EPS that we pay out
in the form of dividend.
Hence the name, the payout ratio.