
PROFESSOR: In this question, we'll
consider a firm that has multiple divisions
and we will see how investments affect
the market value of the firm.
Consider Firm XYZ that has two lines of business,
organized as divisions A and B. Both of these divisions
are risky and generate risky cash flows.
Division A expects to generate a cash flow of $2 million
next year, and this cash flow will
grow at a rate of 3% each year forever.
Division B expects to generate a cash flow of $2 million
next year as well, but the cash flow from this division
will grow at 5% forever.
So division B has a higher growth rate compared
to division A. Currently, the total market value of XYZ
is $87 million.
The cost of capital for the first line of business is 10%.
The first question asks, what is the cost
of capital for the second line of business?
This by itself is a very interesting question
because it makes us realize that divisions in a firm
can be different and they may have different business risk,
as we discussed early in the class.
And so therefore, for this particular firm,
division A has a level of risk that corresponds
to the 10% cost of capital.
But division B may have a different cost
of capital, which this question asks us to compute.
So let's compute it.
Let's first start with this equation
that tells us that the value of the firm
has to be equal to the sum of the value of the two divisions.
So these are market values.

Now, each division produces a perpetual cash flow that
has a constant growth rate.
So it can compute the value of each division
as just simply the present value of growing perpetuity.
So both of these divisions next year
will produce a cash flow of $2 million.
And we know the discount rate for the first division, 10%,
minus the growth rate of 3%.
This would be the present value of the cash flow
that is generated by the first division.
We have the similar equation for the second division,
$2 divided by rb minus 5.
So 5 is the growth rate for the second division.
And rb is the discount rate, which we actually don't know.
But we know that the market value of this firm right
now is $87 million.
So therefore, we have this equation.
And it looks like there is only one unknown in this equation,
so we can solve it for rb, which is, again, the discount
rate for division B.
Solving this equation gives us rb of 8.42%.
So this means that the second division is
less risky than the first one.
And therefore, its cost of capital
is lower than the cost of capital of division A, which
was, again, 10%.
