
PROFESSOR: Assume that the firm is planning
on making an investment which will improve profitability
of both divisions A and B. This project requires
an initial investment of $7 million right now
and will increase cash flow for both divisions by $0.5 million
starting in the year 3.
This additional cash flow will grow
at the same rate as other cash flows
in each division, which means it will
grow at the rate of 3% in division A
and it will grow at 5% in division B.
Assume that the cost of capital for both divisions
is not affected by this project.
If management decides to invest in this new technology,
by how much will the current market value of XYZ increase?

Well, let's compute the NPV of this project.
The NPV of this project equals to the initial investment
that we have to make right now of $7 million
plus the new cash flow that this project will generate.
The first part of this equation is the present value
of the increase in the cash flows
that accrues to division A.
In squared parentheses, we have $0.5 million.
This is the cash flow that will start in year 3.
And we're discounting it to present
by dividing it by 10% minus 3% because it's
a growing perpetuity.
This cash flow is going to grow at 3%,
and the discount rate here is 10%
because this is the risk of division A.
And since this cash flow starts in year 3,
by applying the growing perpetuity formula,
this gives us value in the year two.
So to find the present value, we're
discounting or dividing it by 1 plus 10% raised
to the power of 2.
I highlighted power of 2 here in different colors
so that we understand that the growing perpetuity formula
gives us the value in year two.
Similarly, for division B, the present value
of this additional cash flow is, again,
$0.5 million that accrues to division B.
And we're discounting it here at the cost of capital of division
B. And again, we're realizing that this cash flow of $0.5
million will grow in this division at 5% rate,
similarly to the growth rate in all of the other cash flow
as well.
So therefore, we have the growing perpetuity formula
in the squared parentheses.
And then, we're dividing it and we're
bringing it to present by, again,
using the appropriate cost of capital for division B.
Computing this net present value, we get $11.33 million.
So therefore, the new market value of firm XYZ
is $87 million--
what it was before--
plus the present value or the net
present value of this new investment project,
which is $11.33 million.
So this brings up the market value of XYZ to $98.33 million.
This is an increase of $11.33 divided by $87 million.
So this is an increase of 13.02%.
So by engaging in this investment project,
the management of the company increases its value by 13.02%.
