
PROFESSOR: There is a company called Common App.
It's a startup company that produces Common App.
This company currently does not pay dividends.
It's a startup company so it reinvests all of the earnings
back into its operations.
But it is expected that this company is
going to start paying dividend in year five
and the expectation is that the dividend in year five
will be $1.
After that it is expected that this dividend is
going to grow at the expected rate of 3%,
and this growth is going to continue into perpetuity,
in other words forever.
We will assume that the appropriate discount
rate for the cash flows for the dividends from this stock
is 12%.
The question is, what is the current price
of a share of Common App?
Let's use Gordon growth model to compute the price of the stock.
First, I will put all the dividends on a timeline.
So recall that in the first four years
of the life of this company doesn't pay any dividends
because it's growing, it's reinvesting
all of its earnings, and starting in year five
it will start paying dividends.
So the first dividend will be $1.
From that point onwards the dividend
is going to grow at 3% rate.
So dividend in the year six for example,
is just $1 multiplied by 1 plus 3%.
I will do two steps in order to find the value of the stock
today.
First I will compute the value of all of these dividends
that started in year five and continue
to perpetuity as of year four.
To do that I will simply use the growing perpetuity formula.
So in this case, the price of the stock in year four
is going to be equal to the dividend in the year five,
D5, divided by r minus g, g is the expected growth
rate in dividends, r is the discount rate.
So this is just a simple growing perpetuity.
So D1 equals to $1 and we're dividing it by 12 minus 3%,
this gives me $11.11.
So this is the price of the stock in year four.
Now to find the price of the stock right now,
we need to take the P4 and discount it to present.
So I'm simply taking P4 and I'm dividing it
by 1 plus r raised to the power four,
again, r is our discount rate, so 11.11,
divided by 1 plus 12%, raise to the power four,
this gives me the current price of $7.06.
So the current price of this Common App stock is $7.06.
