
PROFESSOR: As an investor in the stock ABC,
what is the expected return that you will
get from holding this stock?
Let's compute it using the dividend stream and the prices,
the expected the prices per share,
that we computed in this question.
So let's start with this fundamental relationship
between the price today and the price
tomorrow plus the dividends that we get from holding
the stock discounted to today.
So what I will do right now is that I will
rearrange this equation for r.
This is our expected return.
So this is the first step, and this is the second step.
So the expected return equals to the dividend
that we expect to receive from the share tomorrow divided
by the price today plus price tomorrow minus price
today divided by price today.
So recall that this first part, D over p,
we referred to as dividend yield.
And the second part, price tomorrow minus price today
divided by price today, this is what
we refer to as capital gains.
And I will use this relationship to compute the expected return
on the stock of ABC.
Let's start by computing expected return
that we will get between year zero and year one
from holding this stock.
So it's next year's dividends divided by today's share
price-- so this is the dividend yield--
plus capital gain.
So this is the share price in the year
one minus the current share price divided
by the current share price, and this gives me 12%.
And I could just extend this array
and continue this calculation all the way to later years.
And we'll see that in every year,
it's just going to be 12%.
For example, in all of the subsequent years,
because the share price stays the same,
we only get dividends.
And the dividend yield in all of the subsequent years
is exactly 12%.
Now this, of course, should not surprise us
because the expected return is constant.
And it's 12%, and it actually equals the discount rate
that we used, which is the expected return on this stock.
So what we've done right now is that we are actually
doing this calculation backwards because we could've just
answered this question by saying,
well, we already know what is expected return
because we were discounting these cash
flows at the 12% rate.
So the expected return has to be 12%.
But right now, we just computed this
by using the dividend yield and the capital gains
from the dividends and share prices
that we computed in this question.