
PROFESSOR: iDoc is a health service company.
It just paid dividends of $1.50.
Over the next two years, iDoc is expected
to increase their dividends by 10% per year.
After that, the expectation is that these dividends
will continue growing at 3% into perpetuity, so forever.
We also know the appropriate discount rate for the dividends
of iDoc is 8%.
The first question asks us to find the share
price of iDoc right now.
As the first step, let's put all of these dividends
on the timeline.
So the first dividends-- recall that iDoc just paid dividend
of $1.50, which means that in year one,
the dividend's going to be $1.50 times 1 plus 10%, right?
So between year zero and year one, it's going to grow by 10%.
Now, during the year two, it's going to grow by another 10%.
So D2 is going to be equal to D1 multiplied by 1 plus 10%.
Since after that point--
so from year two until year three-- so this dividend,
the growth rate is going to come down from 10% to 3%.
So from this point, the dividend-- so dividend 3--
is going to be equal to dividend 2,
so D2 multiplied by 1 plus 3%.
And now, from year three onwards,
this growth's going to continue at 3%.
So sometimes, this is referred to as a two-stage Gordon Growth
Model.
So we have the first growth stage,
where the dividends grow at 10%.
And then, we'll have the second stage where dividends
grow at a lower rate of 3%.
This represents reality often quite well
because a lot of companies start at the high growth stage
when they're younger.
So in this case, this company grows at 10%.
And then, this growth slows down and becomes perpetual growth
rate.
So in this case, it is 3%.
When we deal with a multistage Gordon Growth Model,
the recipe to solve this question is as follows.
First, we will start at the terminal growth stage--
so in this case, the growth stage two.
What we'll do is that we'll find the share price at the start
of that terminal growth stage.
So we'll compute P2.
So P2 would equal to dividend that we'd get in year 3, so D3.
So again, this would be a next dividend share
price in the year 2.
So P2 is going to equal to D3 divided
by r minus this terminal growth rate, which is--
I'll denote here as g2.
So this is my 3%.
This is to differentiate this from the initial growth
rate of 10%.
And now, I can compute D3 and I can compute P2.
So D3 is going to be equal to--
recall that this is D2 multiplied by 1 plus 3%.
And we know that D2 is D1 multiplied by 1 plus 10%,
and D1 is initial $1.50 multiplied by 1 plus 10%.
So if we collect this altogether, so D3
would equal to initial 1.5 multiplied
by 1.1 multiplied by 1.1 one more
time and multiplied by 1.03.
So this will give me dividend in the year 3.
And so I'm dividing it by 8%, which is my discount
rate, minus this 3%.
This is the second growth stage growth rate.
So this gives me $37.39.
The final step in finding the current share price
in a two-stage growth model is to take the share price
at the start of the second and terminal growth stage, P2,
discounted to present, and take all of the dividends that
accrued to shareholders during the first growth stage
and discount them to present as well.
This together would give us the current share price.
In our case, this is the D1 discounted
to present plus D2 discounted to present plus P2, which
is the share price at the start of the second growth stage,
and discounted to present as well.
We know that D1 is the current dividends, $1.50,
multiplied by 1 plus 10%.
10% is our growth rate during the first stage.
D2 is the current dividend multiplied
by 1 plus 10% squared.
P2-- that we just computed as $37.39,
and we're discounting all of these cash
flows to present at the current discount rate of 8%.
This gives us the current share price of $35.14.
And this is how you find the current share price
in a two-stage growth model.