
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will consider a constant growth
model.
Let's take a firm, ABC.
This firm is expected to produce earnings per share
in Year 1 that equals to $20.
ABC's return on investment or ROI is 20%.
And this ROI is expected to remain constant at this level
forever.
Notice the difference between this question
and question 4 where ROI was not constant.
So for this particular firm ROI is currently 20%
and it is expected to be constant.
ABC's current payout ratio is 55%
and it is also expected to remain at that level forever.
The appropriate discount rate is 12%.
We will answer two questions.
First, we will derive the share price of the stock
and then we will derive its present value
of growth opportunities.
Let's follow the approach we have established in Question 4.
I have put EPS that we expect to get from this firm in Year
1, $20 earnings per share.
Now I will put plowback ratio.
Recorded plowback ratio is 1 minus the payout ratio.
So that means that we are plowing back 45% of EPS
in the Year 1.
And this plowback ratio remains constant forever.
ROI equals to 20%.
And again, this rate will remain constant forever.
Now let's compute the investment as EPS times the plowback
ratio.
The dividends is simply the EPS multiplied
by 1 minus the plowback rate or the payout rate.

And then EPS in the Year 2 will be
the prior year's EPS plus ROI multiplied by the investment.

And so we can just trace these arrays all the way forward
and get these numbers.
So we'll get investments and we'll get dividends.
Now let's look at the dividend stream.
Unlike the previous question, Question 4,
where we've stopped plowing back and we've
started paying out all earnings per share
as dividends at some point, So here we
continue plowing back at a constant rate.
So in this case, dividends always seem to grow.
And they don't stop.
So this is the difference between this question
and the question that we had before.
Now let's compute dividend growth rate
and see at what rate dividends grow in this model.
So I'll compute the growth rate between the year 2 and 1.
So I'll take dividend in Year 2 minus the dividend in the Year
1.
And I'll divide it by the dividend in the Year 1.
And so this seems to be 9%.
And I can just extend this array to see
what is the dividend growth rate for the subsequent years.

And what we see here, very interestingly,
that the dividend growth rate seems to be constant and be
at the rate of 9%.
And I'm doing it only for the first 10 years.
But if we were to extend this all the way to Year 100,
we will actually find out that the dividend growth
rate remains at 9%.
And so this is a very interesting fact of this model
that constant-- there is constant growth
rate in dividends here.
Now let's see if we can analytically
derive the dividend growth rate in this model.
Let b be the plowback ratio.
And so then the dividends in year t
is 1 minus the plowback ratio, again the payout ratio,
at times earnings per share in that year t.
Similarly, next period's dividend is this.
So I colored b here in color red just
to denote that this b, the plowback ratio,
is not going to change.
It's going to be constant.
So this b here is the same in period t plus 1
and in period t.

Now recall that earnings per share in year t plus 1
equals to the prior period's earnings per share plus ROI
times investment.
So again, here ROI is constant.
So I deleted the subscript t from ROI.
And then investment, of course, is just
EPS times the plowback ratio.
And again, this plowback ratio is constant.

Then we can write down the EPS in the year
t plus 1 as EPS in year t multiplied by
1 plus ROI times b.
And now we can plug this in to our dividend equation
for year t plus 1 which would be 1 minus the plowback
ratio times EPS in year t multiplied by 1 plus ROI times
b.
And now we can actually compute the dividend growth
rate, which is dt plus 1 minus dt divided by dt.
And I will express that as Dt plus 1 divided by dt minus 1.
And now into this equation, I will plug in our expressions
for dt plus 1 and dt.
So we just derived what was the Dt plus 1.
So it's 1 minus b multiplied by EPS in year t multiplied
by 1 plus ROI times b.
And dt is just 1 minus b times EPS in year t.
So you could see that 1 minus b and EPS cancels out.
Then what we have is just 1 plus ROI times b minus 1,
which is just ROI times b.
So in this model as long as the firm
maintains constant plowback ratio and has constant ROI,
the dividend growth rate will be time independent.
So it will be constant.
And it will be the product of the return
on investment this firm has and the plowback ratio.
And that's a very important equation that we just derived.
Now going back to our spreadsheet,
it should not surprise us right now
that the dividend growth rate here is 9% and it is constant.
Indeed, if I were to compute it just given
the payout ratio and ROI is just simply
the plowback ratio which is 1 minus the payout
ratio multiplied by ROI.
And so indeed is just 9%.
And this growth rate will remain constant,
as we just analytically showed.
And so then just to find the current share price,
realizing the dividends here grow at a constant rate, 9%,
and this will be a perpetual constant growth rate as long
as, again, the plowback ratio and ROI stay constant,
so all we need to do to find the current share
price because it's the growing perpetuity so we're taking
the dividend that we get in year one
and we're dividing it by r which is our discount rate 12 percent
minus the dividend growth rate of 9%.
And so the current share price of the stock is $366.67.
