
PROFESSOR: Let's solve this question.
And by solving this question, I mean finding the current share
price and understanding the dynamics of the key variables
here.
So in this spreadsheet I put the information
that we're given in the question.
And I would like to start computing and filling
in the blanks for all of the key variables that we have here.
Down at the bottom here, I've written the key equations.
So let's start with investment.
So by definition, investment in Year 1
would be the EPS multiplied by the plow-back ratio.
So that's going to be $16.
It does make sense because our EPS is 20.
We're retaining 80% of that.
So that's $16.
So our investments in Year 1 is $16.
Now we can compute EPS in Year 2 which would be EPS in Year 1
plus ROI in Year 1 which is 20%, multiplied
by the investment which is $16.
And so the earnings per share in Year 2 is going to be $23.20.
Now we can also compute the book value per share
in year one, which would be the prior book value per share
plus the investments that we made in Year 1.
And let's also compute the dividend, which
would be the earnings per share multiplied
by 1 minus the plow-back ratio.
So dividend in Year 1 is $4.
And now we can compute the same calculation.
So again investments in Year 2 will
be our new earnings per share multiplied
by the plow-back ratio.
So it's going to be $11.60.
Earnings per share is going to be $24.94, again computed
as the prior year's earnings per share
plus ROI multiplied by the investment.
Book value per share, again, is just
prior year's book value per share plus the new investment.
And the dividends, again, this is just
EPS multiplied by 1 minus plow-back ratio.
You can see that because in the Year 2
we are retaining half of the EPS.
And half of it we are paying out as dividends.
So of course, investment and dividends
are the same in in the Year 2.
And now all I can do is that I can just simply do this,
stretch all these arrays down.
And because we have these equations,
we will be able to compute the key variables going forward.
Now we could see that again.
So in Year 3 for example, where we retain half
and we pay out half of our EPS, so investment and dividend
is the same.
Then of course starting in Year 4,
because we don't retain any of the earnings,
the investment is 0.
And therefore, earnings per share
stays constant starting from Year 4 onwards.
And in fact, dividends equal earnings per share
starting from Year 4.
And it does make sense because we
don't retain any earnings we pay them all out in dividends.
And you could also see that because investment is 0
so our book value per share stays
constant forever after Year 3.
Now let's look at the relationship between the EPS
and ERT plus 1, and EPS and ERT, and understand
where this equation comes from.
So what I will do here right now is that I will actually
write down year by year earnings per share that
comes from the existing assets and from these new investments
that we're making.
So what I mean is that in Year 1, so there is Year 1 EPS.
So for example, if we have not invested anything at all,
our EPS would have stayed at $20 forever.
Because this is what was given to us.
And so this $20 is something that
is generated by the existing assets,
by the book value per share that we
had prior to making these new investments.
Now the remaining EPS comes from, again,
these new investments.
So in Year 2, we're getting additional earnings
per share from the $16 investments
that we made in Year 1.
So here I will denote what this is.
And so this is just 20% multiplied by $16 investment.
And so, because we said that these investments are such that
they produce earnings per share in perpetuity.
So this $16 and 20% ROI on this investment produces $3.20.
And these earnings will continue in perpetuity.
So here I'm doing just 10 years, but they
will continue into perpetuity.
So similarly, in the Year 2, we invest $11.60 and our ROI is
15.
So starting from Year 2, the new additional EPS
that we get from that investment is just, again,
this ROI multiplied by the investment.

And again, by the same logic, this EPS will continue forever.
And the final investments here we're making in the Year 3
where we're investing $12.47.
And our ROI at that point is 10%.
So we're generating, we're starting generating
this new EPS in Year 4.
And this equals to the investment times ROI.

And again, this continues forever.
So what I've done in this last column
is that so here I'm going to add up all of these EPS.
So in the Year 1, or I'll just sum them all up,
and of course in Year 1 we just have the initial $20.
And then we're adding up all of the investments that our--
all of the earnings per share that our new investments
generate.
And we could, of course, see that the column that I just
computed here, and let me color it in red,
it's the same exact as the EPS that we've computed here
by using this expression.
You can see that this is just mechanically happens
because we're just--
once this investment generates the EPS of 3.20 in the first
year, in Year 2, we're continuing adding it up
because we are writing down those recursive relationship.
And so therefore this equation does make sense.
But this was just to illustrate that these new investments,
indeed, generate perpetual earnings.
And this is how we are computing the EPS in year t plus 1
and relating it to EPS in the year t.
And this equation is indeed giving us
the correct earnings per share given the assumptions
that we made in this model.
Finally, let us compute the share price.
We could see that starting from Year 4,
the dividends are constant.
And therefore from Year 4 onwards,
this is just a simple perpetuity.
So for example, we can start by finding the share
price in Year 9.
So I will take the dividends in Year 10
and I'll just divide it by r.
This is our discount rate.
Again, this is just because this is
a perpetuity and the current share price or share
price in the Year 9 is the present value
of all of the dividends the start from Year 10.
And because this is a perpetuity,
this is the value of share in the Year 9.
And then we can just backfill that all the way to Year 0
by doing this.
So for example, in Year 8, what would be the share price?
Well, the share price would be the dividends
that we get in Year 9 plus the share price
it will be in Year 9 discounted by one year to Year 8.
So I can just write down this fundamental relationship
between the price of one share in Year 8 and Year 9.
So of course, not surprisingly, it
has to be the same, because there was an alternative way,
we could have just written down the same perpetuity present
value formula and it will have given us the same answer.
So that all makes sense.
But what this allows me to do is that this just
allows me to stretch this array all the way to 0.
And this will automatically compute the share price for me.
Because again, what I'm doing is that in every year,
for example, in the Year 1, the way I'm comparing the share
price, I'm taking the dividend they
will get in Year 2 and the share price that will be in Year 2
and then I'm just discounting it to Year 1.
So because this is, again, fundamental relationship
that ties the price right now with the dividend and the price
next period discounted to the period
before, this has to be correct.
And so therefore the current share price of the stock
is $177.02.
