
PROFESSOR: Let's compute the present value
of growth opportunities of this company ABC.
Let's first develop intuition.
Recall that our ROI is 20%, so all our investments
generate perpetual return of 20%.
And the discount rate for the dividends of the stock
is 12%, which means the expected return is
12% is lower than the return on investment
that this firm generates.
So therefore, we should be expecting
that this company has positive present value of growth
options.
And so let's compute it.
We will do exactly the same calculation
as we've done in the previous question.
So I will take first and compute the no growth share price.
So if this firm would not blow back any of the earnings,
starting in year one and starting paying them out
as dividends in year one.
In this case, the dividend level and EPS
would continue staying at 20% per share.
And therefore, the no growth share price
is going to be just simply 20 divided by 12%.
Because it's just going to be a regular perpetuity
of 20% of $20 forever.
And so this is no growth share price.
And so the present value of growth options by definition
is the current share price minus no growth share price.
And so in this case it's going to be $200.
You could see that this is the company that
derives a lot of its current share
price, a lot of its current market value
from these growth opportunities.
And indeed it should again make sense
because their return investment is very high, it's 20%.
So in fact we can compute what fraction of the current share
price comes from these growth opportunities, which
is then doing this calculation.
So taking the present value growth options
and dividing it by the share price.
And we can say that almost 55% of this stock price
is derived from the future growth opportunities.
And the remaining 45% come from the existing assets.
We can also check to see what happens if ROI would
have been lower and not 20%.
For example, if ROI instead would had been 15%,
we would intuitively expect that the present value
of growth options of this company would have been lower.
And therefore, the fraction of share price
that is attributable to growth options
would have been lower as well.
So let's try doing that.
To put 15% here, we see that the presence of our growth options
and the fraction of those growth options in the share price
drops to 20%.
And of course, if ROI would be 12%, which
would have been the same as the cost of capital
for this company, the discount rate that we're using, 12%.
In this case, intuitively, the presence of our growth options
should have been 0.
And so if I hit Enter, it indeed shows me that PVGO is 0
and the share price is the same as it
would have been if this company did not
log back any of its earnings.