
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
start with the basics of the dividend discount model.
Supposed that now is year zero.
There is a firm called ABC and it is expected to pay $2.50
dividend per share in next year or in Year 1.
In the Year 2, you expect this dividend to remain at the same
level or at $2.50.
You also expect that ABC stock price will be $35 in Year 2.
We will assume that the appropriate discount
rate for the stock is 10%.
The first question asks, what price
would you be willing to pay for a share of ABC stock
today if you planned to hold the stock for two years?
Question b, suppose instead you plan
to hold the stock for one year.
What price would you expect to be
able to sell a share of ABC stock for in one year?
And finally, question c, given the answer in part b,
what price would you be willing to pay for a share of ABC stock
today if you planned to hold the stock for one year?
And then we will compare this answer
to the one we've got in part a.
So let's start with the first, with part a.
It'd be useful to draw just a timeline for us
to visualize what we'd get by buying this stock.
So we're paying the current price or P0 right now.
And then by holding the stock for two years,
we get the following thing.
So we get dividend, the first dividend at the end of Year 1.
Again so here we're just assuming that the stock
pays annual dividends.
Then we also get dividend at the end of Year 2.
And then we sell the stock at the price at the end of Year 2
at P2.
So therefore to find the current price of the stock P0,
we just have to discount the two cash flows that we
get in Year 1 and 2 to present.
And so let us do that.
So this is the equation.
So P0 would equal to D1 divided by 1 plus r plus D2 plus P2
divided by 1 plus r squared.
We can put the numbers in.
So we get $2.50 first dividend.
We also get $2.50, the second dividend.
And we expect that the price at the end of Year 2
is going to be $35.
We are given the discount rate, which is 10%.
So all we have to do is to compute this value right now.
So the current price will be $33.26.
Now let's turn to part b, suppose
that instead you plan to hold a stock only for one year.
For how much you expect to be able to sell it in one year?
So the question asks us what is our expectation, what would
be the stock price in Year 1.
Well, we have a certain expectation
for the dividend in Year 2 and for the price in Year 2.
So for us to estimate what would be the price in Year 1,
we're taking the cash flows that we
get from the stock in the Year 2 so this is the second dividend
and the price in Year 2.
And we would discount it to Year 1.
So we're taking D2 plus P2 and dividing it by 1 plus 10%.
If you put the numbers in, it tells us
that the stock price in the Year 1,
or our expectation of how much we can sell, it,
will be $34.09.
Now finally, let's turn to part c of this question.
So given our answer in part b right now,
so given the price P1 that we just computed,
what would be the price that you're
willing to pay for a share of this stock today?
If you again expect to be able to sell it in the Year 1 at P1?
Well, then from this perspective,
from this perspective of a one-year investor,
the current price should be just the cash flow
that you get from the stock in Year 1.
So it's your first dividend 2.50 plus P1.
So this is for how much you're expecting
to be able to sell this stock discounted to present.
So D1 plus P1 divided by 1 plus r.
Again, r here is 10% And so if we put the numbers in we get
$2.50 plus $34.09.
So this is the P1 that we computed in part
b, divided by 1 plus 10%.
And this gives us $33.26.
So in fact, in part a of this question and in part c,
we got exactly the same answer.
So it's $33.26.
We have demonstrated that the current price
P0, that the one-year investor and the two-year investor
willing to pay for this stock is the same.
This is because the one-year investor also
cares about the dividend and price in Year 2.
Because these determine the price at which
she can sell the stock at the end of Year 1
to an investor with similar beliefs.
Now this last bit is very important.
These two investors must have similar beliefs.
If they don't, for example they differ
in their expectation what would be
the price of the stock in a Year 2,
then of course they would disagree
about the current stock price.
Therefore, the very important lesson
that this question demonstrates is that disagreements in value
are due to difference in beliefs and not
in the investment horizon.
Because if these two investors have exactly the same beliefs
about the future dividends and the future prices of the stock,
they will assign exactly the same value today
regardless of the investment horizon.