PROFESSOR: Forward contracts are the most widely used tools
for risk management in the world.
Notice that the term risk management encompasses
the idea of hedging or reducing risk,
such as when a farmer uses a forward contract
to lock in the selling price of his wheat.
But the term risk management also
encompasses speculative trades, such as when
the buy side of that forward contract
doesn't plan to use the wheat but instead is
taking a calculated risk that the price of the wheat
will exceed the forward price paid.
Other derivative contracts, such as futures and swaps,
are particular types of forward contracts.
We'll talk about those next week.
Let's start with a precise definition
of a forward contract.
A forward contract is an agreement
between two counterparties to trade a pre-specified amount
of goods or securities at a pre-specified future date,
which we'll call capital T, for a pre-specified forward price,
capital F subzero, where 0 denotes that the time is now.
It's free to enter a forward contract initially.
However, to ensure that both sides meet their obligations,
collateral often has to be posted.
Sometimes forward contracts call for a payment
up front instead of a contract expiration.
That's called a prepaid forward contract.
The price in a prepaid forward contract
is just the present value of the regular forward price,
but otherwise, the two types of contracts are identical.
I'm mentioning this because we'll
see that the prepaid price is mathematically
quite useful in some hedging applications
that we'll look at.
The key observation that's used for pricing forward contracts
is that the pre-specified forward price of 0
must be set to ensure that the value of the contract
is 0 from the perspective of both counterparties
at inception.
This has to be the case, since it's
free to enter the contract.
Some important terminology is that the buyer
of the asset in the forward contract
is on the long side of the contract.
The buyer has taken a long position.
On the other side, the seller is on the short side
of the contract and is said to be short the contract.
Two other important features--
first, most forward contracts trade
over the counter, which means through privately
arranged trades rather than on an exchange.
Brokers and dealers often serve as intermediaries,
matching sellers with buyers.
OK.
Importantly, forward contracts can
involve the physical delivery of the underlying asset
or they can be cash settled.
With physical delivery, as it sounds,
the underlying asset is delivered to the buyer
by the seller in exchange for the forward price.
Cash settlement, which involves a payment linked
to the current price of the underlying commodity,
is convenient in cases where physical delivery
is costly or complicated.
For example, imagine the difficulty
of having to deliver all 500 stocks in the right proportions
on an S&P 500 forward contract.
Such contracts are typically cash settled
to avoid those complications.
We will see that the financial value of the contract
is the same with either physical or with cash settlement.
It's fairly straightforward to find
the profit or loss on a forward contract at expiration.
In general, we'll call s sub T the spot
price, or current market price, of the underlying asset
in the contract at time little t.
Assume, too, that the contract covers n units of the asset.

The payoff will depend on the number of units
and on the difference between the current spot price
and the forward price locked in on the contract.
Let's look at this from the perspective of the long side
of the contract.
The long earns the spot price minus the forward price
on n units of the asset.
That corresponds to the long ping of sub-0 per unit,
and then receiving the n assets via the forward contract,
and then turning around and selling the assets at the spot
price s capital T in the spot market.
Clearly, the profit or loss to the short side
is just the negative of the profit or loss
to the long side.
The contract is always zero-sum between them.
The questions in this box are a useful check
on your basic understanding of how forward contracts work,
the payoffs to both sides, and why
the contract can create value for users even though they
are zero-sum.
In the recitation, JR will discuss these answers with you,
but it's a good exercise to think about them
and discuss them with your fellow students beforehand.
This figure summarizes the timing
of cash flows and payoffs that we've been talking about.
The forward price is agreed to between the long and short
sides of the contract at time 0.
No money changes hands, but either
or both counterparties may have to post collateral
to protect against default. At contract expiration,
the profit or loss per unit of the underlying
depends on the difference between the forward price set
and the contract and the current spot price.
The payoff is zero-sum between the long side of the contract
and the short side of the contract.
