
INSTRUCTOR: Let's look at an example of how forward currency
contracts are often used to hedge against exchange rate
risk.
Imagine that a US firm has sold a piece of equipment
to a German client, and the firm has
agreed to accept the payment of 5 million euros
to be paid in six months.
At time t when the agreement is made,
the exchange rate is $1.2673 USD per euro.
What's the risk for the US firm?
Well, clearly, there's exchange rate risk
because over the next six months,
euros could depreciate relative to the dollar.
The unhedged dollar value of the payment in six months
will be 5 million euros times whatever the exchange
rate turns out to be in six months, which
is a random variable.

To hedge this exposure, the firm can
enter into a forward contract with a bank
to sell the euros forward.
In that contract, say that the firm
agrees to deliver 5 million euros in six months in exchange
for dollars at a pre-specified exchange
rate of $1.28 per euro.
That position can be described as the firm being short
the euro forward.
At the expiration date in six months,
the profit or loss on the forward contract
with the bank in dollars is $5 million times
the forward rate locked in minus the spot exchange rate
in six months of dollars per euros.

The firm also receives the 5 million
euro payment from its client, which
has dollar value of 5 million euros multiplied by the spot
exchange rate in six months.
Putting the two transactions together,
the effect of the spot exchange rate in six months cancels out,
and the firm has locked in a dollar payment of $6.4 million
based on the forward rate of 1.28.
This is a good example for reviewing payoff diagrams,
which are often used as a tool to understand
the full range of possible outcomes
from decisions that involve a combination of derivatives
and other investments whose payoff also depends
on the value of a common underlying asset.
In a payoff diagram, the x-axis is a variable
that represents the value of the underlying asset
at some future point in time.
In this example, it represents the future spot exchange rate
of dollars per euro in six months.
The y-axis on a payoff diagram is the profit or loss
from a position or combination of positions
represented on the diagram.
The payoff here is denominated in dollars.
So the top diagram describes the original exposure,
which is based on the value of the receivable of 5
million euros in six months in dollar terms.
If euros are worthless at that time,
then the payoff will be 0.
As the exchange rate rises, the dollar payoff
rises linearly with it.

Now let's turn to the payoff on this short forward position
in euros.
From the formula we have for profit or loss,
at a spot exchange rate of $1.28 per euro,
the forward rate we assumed was set in the contract,
the payoff will be 0.

For spot exchange rates above 1.28,
the forward contract entails a loss and vice
versa for spot exchange rates below 1.28.
For a position that has multiple components that all depend
on the same underlying variable, we
can always find the net payoff by vertically
adding the component payoffs on a payoff diagram.
In this case, adding together the payoffs
on the original exposure with the payoffs
on the forward contract at each point on the x-axis
generates the net payoff illustrated
in the hedged position diagram.

The forward contract gains or losses
exactly offset the losses or gains on the original exposure,
leaving the firm with a certain dollar payoff of $6.4 million
that we calculated algebraically on the previous slide.

Well, you might wonder what could go wrong here.
Is this payoff really 100% safe?
The answer is that it is as long as all of the contracts
are actually honored.
However, if the German client defaults,
the firm is still obligated to make good
on its forward contract.
And it would lose money on the forward contract
if the dollar were to appreciate.
In general, it's impossible to know
when someone entering a forward contract
or some other derivative position
is hedging or speculating without having
some additional information.
A derivatives position functions as a hedge
when it offsets the risk of another position
in an investor's portfolio, as when the exporter here
was going to be long euros from the sale of the goods.
It's speculation when there's no offsetting exposure.
Speculators serve an important function in derivatives markets
by helping to make it possible for hedgers
to protect themselves even when there aren't enough
other hedgers with an opposite exposure
to take the other sides of the contract.
The diagram shown here is again the payoff
on a short forward contract in euros.
Taken alone, it represents a speculative bet
that the value of euro will fall against the dollar.
As we'll see next, this is effectively
the short side of a highly-levered position
in euros.
