PROFESSOR: Let's spend a few minutes reviewing
the idea of risk-free interest rates and the yield curve,
since they're central to pricing forward contracts
and other derivatives.
A risk-free bond promises future payments that
are free from default risk.
Its price is the present value of those promised payments.
An important type of bond for our purpose
here is a zero-coupon, also called a pure discount bond,
that promises a single payment at maturity
equal to its face value.
Here we call that face value capital
Z. Given the market price of a zero-coupon bond, p, its face
value, Z, the maturity date, capital T,
we can infer the risk-free interest rate, or yield,
from the formula on the slide.

In this representation, the interest rate, r sub T,
is stated on a continuous basis.
That's a common way rates are represented in derivatives
pricing formulas.
However, in other markets, such as bond markets,
yields are often stated on an annual, semiannual, monthly,
even daily basis.
And we'll use those alternatives in some
of the examples we look at.

Notice that if you know the price
of the bond and its promised payments
and its time to maturity, then you can infer the yield.
And if you know the yield, the promised payments, and the time
to maturity, you can infer the price.
The price and the yield contain the same information.
In terms of the underlying economics of the situation,
you should think of the forces of supply and demand
determining the risk-free interest rate or the price
for every zero-coupon bond for every possible maturity.
I want to turn back and say a few more words also
about the Treasury spot yield curve.
The yield curve, which is also known
as the term structure of interest rates,
is the relationship between bond yields and bond maturities.
In practice, the risk-free yield curve
is often calculated from the market prices of US Treasury
securities.
Since there may be no maturing Treasury
security on a particular future date,
the spot rates for that date have to be interpolated.
Finally, it's important to understand
that bonds like Treasury bonds, whose promised cash flows are
free from default risk, still entail
significant risk for investors because the bond's market
price will change over time as market interest rates change.
Hedging bond price risk is a very popular use
of derivatives contracts, and in particular,
forwards, futures, and swaps.

Forward contract prices for bonds
and other fixed-income securities
are closely tied to the yield curve,
and in particular, to the implied forward rates
in the yield curve.
We'll see why in more detail next week.
But for now, let's review the idea of implied forward rates.
We just saw that, in general, the price
today of a zero-coupon bond maturing at time T2
is found by discounting the face value, Z, that's paid at T2,
buy the yield to maturity, r sub T2.

As we'll see soon, a no-arbitrage argument
ties down the forward price for this bond
for delivery at time T1.
The forward price is just the future value of the time zero
bond price as of T1 computed using the current yield,
r sub T1.

Now, substituting for the bond price into the forward price,
we can express the forward price in terms of the yields, r of T1
and r of T2, in the current yield curve.

Now let's turn to forward rates.
Implicit in forward prices are forward rates.
A forward rate is the interest rate
locked in a forward contract on the underlying security.
In this example, the forward contract
is for delivery of a zero-coupon bond
at time T1 that matures at time T2.
So at T1, it will have remaining life, T2 minus T1.

The implied forward rate is defined
as the yield that equates the present value of the cash
flow on the bond at T2 with the forward price paid at T1.

Equating our two equations for the forward price
and solving for the implied forward rate by rearranging,
we come up with this important formula
for the implied forward rate.

Contracts based on forward rates, which
include bond market futures contracts, short-term interest
rate contracts and interest rate swaps,
all are based on this fundamental formula relating
forward rates for any future time interval
to the yield curve.

Beyond pricing forward contracts on fixed-income securities,
the standard formulas used for derivative pricing
depend on the assumption that market participants
can borrow or lend at a risk-free rate,
or at least very close to it.
In practice, market participants can accomplish
risk-free borrowing and lending by buying and selling
Treasury securities or by using collateralized borrowing
and lending, often with repurchase agreements,
also known as RPs or repos.
