PROFESSOR: We can now turn back to payoff diagrams
as a way to understand why a long position
in a forward contract is like a highly-leveraged position
in the underlying asset.
For this example, let's consider a forward contract
on a share of stock which locks in a forward price of $65
to buy a share.
We'll construct a portfolio of the underlying
stock and a risk-free, zero-coupon bond that
has payoffs that are identical to our forward contract.
Let's start with the bond.
The first path diagram here is the payoff
on a zero-coupon bond with a face
value of $65 that matures on the same day
as the forward contract on the stock
that we want to compare it with.

The payoff on a long position in the bond
is $65 no matter what the value of the underlying stock
is on the expiration or maturity date of the contract.
Hence, the payoff diagram shows a horizontal line at $65.

For a short position in the bond,
the payoff is also invariant to the stock price.
The seller of the bond on a short position
is out the face value of the $65 no matter
what happens to the price of the underlying stock.
Hence, the payoff diagram shows a horizontal line at minus $65.

Now let's look at the payoff diagram
for long and short positions in the underlying stock.
If you own the stock, its value on the expiration date
of the forward contract is whatever the stock price
is on that same day.
Hence, the payoff increases one-for-one with the stock
price as in the top diagram.
And as for the bond, a short position
in the stock on a payoff diagram flips
the outcomes over the x-axis.
A short position involves a loss of the value on the expiration
date equal to the price of the stock that day.
Hence, the payoff decreases one-for-one
with the stock price as in the lower diagram here.
Let's consider the payoff on a long forward contract
in the stock with a forward price of $65.
We know that the payoff at expiration
will be the difference between the stock
price on that date minus the $65 paid in the forward contract.
The payoff, therefore, increases linearly and one-for-one
in the price of the stock starting at minus $65
if the stock price is $0.

And, finally, let's compare the payoff diagram
on the forward contract to the one for a portfolio that's
long one share of the stock and short a zero-coupon bond
with a face value of $65 that matures
on the same date as the forward contract.
The payoff on that portfolio is found by vertically adding
the payoffs we found earlier.
The short bond always has a payoff of minus $65.
And the stock value increases one-for-one in the stock price.
The result is plotted on the bottom diagram.
We can see that no matter what happens to the underlying stock
price, the payoff on the forward contract
will be identical to the payoff on the portfolio consisting
of a share of the stock and the short bond.
This can be described, then, as a highly-leveraged position
in the stock because shorting a bond
is borrowing and the borrowed money
is used to help fund the stock purchase.
In other words, a so-called leveraged position
is one that is funded in part by borrowing.
This equivalence between a forward contract
and its replicating portfolio will also
be key to pricing forward contracts.
The bottom line is that long forward contracts
allow market participants to take highly-leveraged positions
in the risky underlying asset with little
or no money down, even if they couldn't do so directly
by borrowing and buying the risky asset.
A similar analysis implies that forward short positions
are equivalent to lending and going
short in the underlying asset.
This provides short risk exposure
to an underlying asset, either to hedge or to speculate, again
with no money down.
