PROFESSOR: We're almost ready to turn to pricing formulas
and how they were derived but, first, just a little
more background information.
I want you to remember that an arbitrage opportunity is
a trading strategy that either yields a positive profit today
with no future costs or that costs nothing today but yields
a positive profit in the future.
In other words, a way to make free money.
The pricing formulas for forward contracts and other derivatives
are often derived using no-arbitrage arguments.
That is, their prices adjust so that no arbitrage opportunities
exist.
Price deviations might arise temporarily,
but traders try to exploit the situation
and that quickly pushes prices back in line.

No arbitrage doesn't mean the prices are
right in any kind of an absolute sense
or that there's no market frictions,
it just means that relative prices
between different securities are consistent.
The absence of arbitrage leads to the famous Law of One Price.
Securities with identical future payoffs
must have the same price today.
Otherwise, traders would buy low, sell high,
and pocket an arbitrage profit with all future cash
flows canceling each other out.
Now, in the more realistic situation,
when there's a bid-ask spread between the price
that an asset can be bought and sold for,
we can find no-arbitrage bounds on prices rather than
a single no-arbitrage price.
For any market price that lies inside those bounds,
there's no arbitrage opportunity.
You'll be asked to derive an example of such bounds
in one of the homework problems.
The final ingredient we need before turning to driving
pricing formulas is the idea of short sales,
also called short selling.
As you know, a short position is one in which
a trader sells an asset.
There are two ways to sell short.
The first is to sell an asset you already own.
The second is to borrow it from someone who owns it
and then sell it.
The trader must later buy the asset
and return it to the lender.
The trader must also replace the value of interest or dividend
payments that come in while the asset is borrowed.
In exchange for lending the asset,
the lender typically receives a small fee.
Now, sometimes it can be difficult, or even impossible,
to find the desired asset to borrow in short.
When shorting becomes expensive or isn't possible,
derivative prices can diverge from what is predicted
using no-arbitrage conditions.
