
PROFESSOR: We're now going to put the idea of no arbitrage
to work to drive pricing formulas for many of the most
popular forward contracts.
In general, forwards for what are called pure investment
assets, like stocks, bonds, and currencies,
can be priced using no arbitrage arguments.
For instance, we'll return to Example 2.1
on forward currency contracts and see
where the forward price of $1.28 per euro came from.
Specifically, we'll derive formulas
by considering a so-called cash and carry strategy
that will generate arbitrage profits for traders
if forward prices differ from their theoretical values.

While simple cash and carry logic
ties down the forward prices for pure investment assets,
pricing is more complicated for non-investment assets,
such as agricultural products, energy, and metals.
We will also look at the determinants
of those forward prices and common formulas used
to price them.

This very important slide shows the pricing formulas
for the forward prices of stocks, bonds, and currencies.
You'll find it useful in answering some of the homework
questions for this week.
There are several similarities between all of these formulas.
First, the forward price always depends
on the current spot price of the underlying asset,
for stocks, for bonds, and for currencies.
Second, it involves a future value factor
based on the risk-free interest rate
and on the maturity equal to the time to the contract
expiration.

Third, there's an adjustment for any cash flows
that arrive between the time the contract is
written at time zero and the contract expiration date.
In the case of stocks, those cash flows are dividends.

For bonds or loans, the cash flows
are coupons or interest payments.
And for currencies, the cash flow
is the interest income from investing in a risk-free bond.

With regard to these cash flow adjustments,
the formulas differ slightly, depending
on whether the payment is assumed
to be continuous or discrete.
A continuous flow is the natural assumption, for example,
in the case of the dividend yield on the S&P 500 stock
price index.
However, if the underlying is an individual stock,
dividend payments are more realistically modeled
as the discrete flow at a known future point in time.

Let's look at an example of how these formulas can be applied.
Remember Example 2.1, where we looked
at a US firm that wanted to hedge its exposure to exchange
rate risk arising from a receivable of 5 million euros
that would be arriving in six months.
In that example, we assume that the spot exchange rate
is $1.2673 per euro currently.
Remember that the unhedged dollar payoff
will depend on the exchange rate in six months
and equals 5 million euros times whatever that exchange
rate turns out to be.
Let's also assume that we know that the current six-month US
dollar risk-free free interest rate is 5%
and that the current six-month euro risk-free interest
rate is 3%.

Recall that to hedge the risk that the dollar would
strengthen against the euro, the firm entered into a contract
to sell euros forward in exchange for the dollars.
We assumed that the forward rate was
$1.28 per euro, which implied that the firm could lock
in a certain dollar payment which we calculated to be
$6.4 million in six months.

Using the formula for currency forwards
and plugging in this information, that
is the current spot exchange rate was $1.2673,
the dollar interest rate was 5%, the euro interest rate was 3%,
and the time horizon is six months,
you can verify that the implied forward exchange
rate is $1.28 per euro.
I showed you formulas for the forward prices of stocks,
bonds, and currencies that all depend on current spot
prices, risk-free interest rates,
any cash flows on the underlying assets
over the life of the contract, and the time
until contract expiration.
Where do these similarities come from?
The answer is they come from the cash
and carry strategy that leads to a no arbitrage condition.
That strategy is similar in all three cases,
and we'll go through one example here in detail.
Specifically, let's consider a trading strategy
involving a short forward position in one share
of a non-dividend-paying stock.
As usual, we'll call the contract expiration date
capital T. We'll start with the multiple transactions at time
zero.
First, enter into a short forward position.
Remember that this requires no upfront payment.

It locks in an obligation to deliver a share of stock
at a time, capital T, in return for the forward price,
capital F. Now also at time zero,
you're going to buy the stock at its current spot price, P sub
S.
Importantly, we're going to pay for that purchase with borrowed
money.
Because you've bought the stock with borrowed money
and also the forward contract involves no initial payment,
the net cash flow at time zero is certainly equal to zero.

Now, let's unwind the position at the contract expiration
date, cap T. You receive the forward price
in the forward contract and deliver the share of stock.
You also have to repay the money you borrowed with interest.

You're going to use the stock that you bought to deliver
into the forward contract.

The net time, T, cash flow then is the difference
between the forward price received
in the forward contract and the money repaid on the loan.

Notice that all of these outcomes
involve no uncertainty.
Now, we can appeal to the no arbitrage idea that a trading
strategy that costs nothing to enter into cannot generate
a positive profit in the future.
Hence, we can conclude that the forward price
has to be less than or equal to the loan repayment amount.

We can finish nailing down the forward price
by considering a similar set of transactions
but this time involving a long position in a forward contract
on that same stock.
This is called a reverse cash and carry.
At time zero, enter into a long forward position.
At the same time, short the stock at its current spot
price.
Also, lend the amount received from that short sale
of the stock at the risk-free rate.
Because you've sold the stock and lent out the money
you received and because the forward contract involves
no initial payment, the net cash flow at time zero
is identically zero.
Now, let's unwind the position at the contract expiration
date, cap T. You pay the forward price, F,
and you receive the stock in the forward transaction.
You use the stock you receive in the contract
to cover your short position that you took a time zero.
That is you return the stock that you borrowed.
You also receive the money that you lent out,
plus the accumulated interest payment.
The net time, cap T, cash flow is the difference
between the loan repayment and the forward price you paid out.
Notice that all of these values are certain.
Let's again apply no arbitrage logic.
The time zero cash flow is zero, so there
can be no future profit.
We can conclude that the forward price
has to be greater than or equal to the loan repayment amount.

Putting together the conclusions of the cash and carry
and the reverse cash and carry logic,
we can conclude that the forward price
for a non-dividend-paying stock must
be exactly equal to the future value of its spot price.
For stocks that pay a dividend, or for coupon bonds,
similar logic holds, but adjustments
must be made for the cash flows from dividends or coupons
over the life of the contract.
The general intuition there is that because a dividend
or a coupon payment reduces the remaining
value of an asset's cash flows, it reduces its forward price.
In the recitation, you'll see how this line of reasoning
ties down the forward price of currencies.
