
PROFESSOR: Some of the oldest and most
important foreign contracts were designed
to help farmers and industrial firms
hedge some of their largest risk exposures.
These contracts are for commodities
such as oil, metals, and major agricultural commodities.
Unlike financial assets that are essentially costless to store
and whose returns are in cash and so
equally valuable to all investors,
the situation is more complicated
for these storable commodities.

The main costs are for storage.
We'll denote by a capital U any lump sum costs,
like monthly facility fees, and use a small u
to represent storage costs on a proportional flow basis.
Storage costs vary over time and with the availability
and demand for space which, in turn, will
depend on the demand for the underlying commodity.
There's also the offsetting notion
of a convenience yield, which measures
the benefit of physically having possession of a commodity.
For example, if you have oil on-hand,
it insures against supply disruptions
that could cause costly production slowdowns.
Mathematically adjusting for storage costs and convenience
yields and forward pricing formulas
is analogous to the adjustments for dividend or coupon payments
that we talked about for financial forward contracts.
Storage costs are like negative dividends
and convenience yields are like positive dividends.

Now let's take a close look at the formulas
for the forward prices of storable commodities.
As with financial forwards, all of these formulas
involve the current spot price of the underlying,
the risk-free rate, and the time horizon
of the forward contract.
Then we'll have to make adjustments for storage costs
and convenience yields, just as we did for dividends and coupon
payments in the financial asset case.
Looking at the first formula, where there are just
lumps some storage costs, the forward price has to be higher
to compensate for the value of those storage costs which
are incurred by the short side of the contract.

When the storage costs are incurred
as a proportional flow, the same logic
leads to the second equation.

When there's a positive convenience yield,
the value of those services to the short side
causes forward prices to be lower.

In the last equation, which is the more general case,
there are both storage costs and a convenience yield that
pull in opposite directions.
Over time, as interest rates, storage costs, and convenience
yields change with market conditions,
you can see that the forward price will change
and it can be higher or lower than the current spot price.

These formulas also arise from the no-arbitrage logic
of Cash-and-Carry trading strategies.
However, because storage costs and convenience yields
can vary considerably across market participants
and across time, they can be difficult to identify.

The offsetting effect on forward prices of storage costs
and convenience yields also vary with the forward contract
maturity.
At any point in time and for any commodity
on which forward contracts are available,
we can plot a forward curve.
The forward curve gives the relationship
between the forward price and the maturity of the contract.
Notice that the short end of the forward curve
is always fixed at the current spot price of the commodity
by a no-arbitrage condition that forward prices converge to spot
prices as contracts mature.
When the forward curve is upward-sloping,
the forward market is said to be in contango
and when the forward curve is downward-sloping,
it's called backwardation.

This graph shows a variation in the forward curve
for a commonly traded type of oil known as West Texas
Intermediate, or WTI.

The solid line is the spot price at each date on the x-axis.

The forward curve, starting at the selected date,
is also plotted as a dashed line.
You can see that backwardation is
more common than contango over this period
but that both situations occur.

Looking back at the formulas, for backwardation to occur
requires that the convenience yield
is greater than the combined effect of storage
costs and the interest rate.

Interestingly, more recently, there
was an episode where spot oil prices went negative
because demand plummeted.
And it isn't possible to quickly turn off oil pumps.
Storage capacity was completely exhausted
and the price of storage became very high.
During that episode, what do you think
happened to the forward curve?
Well, we can answer that question by, again,
referring back to our pricing formula that relates forward
price to the spot price, the interest rate, storage
costs, and convenience yields.
Nothing special happened to the interest rates.
And holding oil became more of an inconvenience
than a convenience.
Storage costs went up sharply.

We would then expect to see a sharply upward-sloping
forward curve, and that is in fact what happened.

Forward contracts are also written
on non-storable or short-lived commodities like electricity
or fresh fruit and vegetables.
For such products, forward prices
are not tied to current spot prices
by no-arbitrage conditions.
Rather, for these non-storable commodities,
forward prices contain additional information
over spot prices about expected future market conditions.
For example, if a future strawberry harvest
is expected to be low because of too little rain,
the forward price will be higher than if a bumper
crop had been expected.
Estimating the fair forward price
for non-storable commodities then
involves modeling stochastic future supply and demand
and also determining an appropriate risk-adjusted
discount rate.

Let's take stock of what we've learned
about the pricing of forward contracts for financial assets
and storable commodities and draw out
some surprising implications that are
important for you to remember.
If you look back at any of the formulas we've discussed,
a surprising and important fact is that the forward price
doesn't reflect any information about future market conditions
beyond what is reflected in the current spot price.
That's because forward prices are tied down
by no-arbitrage conditions that only involve the current spot
price, the risk-free rate, and anticipated cash flows.
This means that it's a mistake to try to use forward prices
to predict future spot prices.
For example, let's think about the forward price
of a non-dividend-paying stock, say on Tesla,
and compare it to the expected future price
of the stock on the expiration date of the forward contract.
Which is higher?
Well, recall that the expected return on a stock
includes a risk premium that's compensation for market risk.
And hence, the expected return on Tesla
is higher than the risk-free rate.
By contrast, the forward price is
based on an expected return that's
equal to the risk-free rate.
Hence, the forward price of a stock
tends to give a downward-biased estimate of the future price
of the stock.
