
PROFESSOR: In the last segment for this week,
I want to turn to how the price of a forward contract
changes over time and its relevance
for hedging and speculative strategies.

So far, we've focused on how prices of new forward contracts
are set.
We've seen that those prices imply that initially, it's
free to enter into a longer short position on the contract.
Over time, though, as market conditions change,
so does the value of an existing forward contract.
What happens to the forward price over time
affects the success of hedges or speculative strategies.
It's also important when traders want
to exit a contract before expiration, for instance,
because the asset that was being hedged has been sold.
A forward contract can be exited by taking an offsetting
forward position.
If you're long a contract you want to get out of,
you can enter the short side of the identical contract,
and vice versa to get out of a short position.
Alternatively, you can sell the contract
to another trader for its current value.
In either case, closing out the contract
will entail a gain or loss if the forward price has changed
from its original value.
Here's the algebra.
We'll call k the original forward price
specified in the contract.
We're looking at time 0.
The same contract, were written at a later time-- little t--
would have a forward price--
capital F, sub little t--
based on current market conditions and the remaining
maturity of the contract, which at this point is capital T,
minus little t.
By the principle of no arbitrage,
the value at any time T of a long position
is going to be the present value of the difference
between the current forward price
and the original forward price.

A good exercise is to try to describe the training
strategy that generates an arbitrage
profit if this relationship doesn't hold.
A forward contract, as we know, is always
zero sum between the long and short contract holders.
So the value of the short position over time
will still be the negative of the value of the long position.

Well, hedging with the forward contract
involves taking the opposite position
in the forward contract from your spot and exposure.
For example, say you currently own
100 shares of Alphabet stock as part of your portfolio,
and you want to lock in a current future selling
price for the shares.
You could do that by shorting a forward contract on 100
shares of the Alphabet stock.
For that hedge to be effective, the forward and spot prices
of the cash and forward position have
to move together over time.
The difference between the spot price and the forward price
is called the basis.
An important fact about the basis
is that it always goes to 0 on the expiration
date of a forward contract.
Otherwise, one could buy spot and sell
forward, or vice versa, and capture an arbitrage profit.
However, as the graph here illustrates,
the basis can be wide prior to expiration.
And there's uncertainty about how that basis is
going to move over time.
For example, a big change in the convenience yield
of a commodity could cause its basis to jump.
Also note that the basis can be positive or negative, depending
on market conditions.
When a hedge is set up that will be closed out
prior to contract expiration, this basis risk
can be quite significant, and means that the hedge may not
be very effective.
Well, this brings us to the related issue of cross hedging.
It's frequent that a contract in one type of security
or commodity is used to hedge a risk
exposure in a different, but related, security or commodity.
So for example, an electric utility
might hedge some of its production costs
using contracts on West Texas crude oil,
even though the oil that it uses in production
comes from a different source.
Why do a cross hedge?
Well, often the reason to cross hedge
is for liquidity and to reduce transactions costs.
Certain forward contracts, such as those
traded on futures exchanges, are more available and more liquid
than others, making them less expensive to transact in.
The disadvantage of cross hedging, as we saw,
is that the basis risk tends to be greater,
reducing the quality of the hedge.
In setting up a hedge using forward contracts,
a fundamental question is how to choose the size
of your forward position.
That question is answered by calculating a hedge ratio.
The hedge ratio is the relative number
of units of assets in the forward contract to units
of assets being hedged that maximizes
the effectiveness of the hedge.
In order to have the same total price
change in your spot in forward positions
to create that offset, it must be
that the size of the spot position multiplied
by the expected change in the price per unit
is equal to the size of the forward position
times the expected change in the forward price, again per unit.

Rearranging this equation gives the hedge ratio,
which is the size of the spot position relative to the size
of the forward position in terms of the relative expected price
changes.
To implement a hedge ratio in practice,
you'll need to have an estimate of the expected price
change, both for your spot and forward positions.
One of the homework problems asks
you to do this in the context of hedging a stock position.
To answer it, you'll need to recall what you learned earlier
in the MicroMasters Program about expected stock
returns and the CAPM.