PROFESSOR: Like all forward contracts,
a futures contract locks in a price
today for a transaction that will occur on a specified
future date.
Futures contracts, though, have a number of special features
that are designed to enhance liquidity and minimize trading
costs.
First, the contracts are traded on an exchange
like the well-known Chicago Mercantile
Exchange, the CME, or the Intercontinental Exchange, ICE.
The Exchange clears all trades and acts
as what's called the central counterparty, eliminating
bilateral default risk between individual traders
and preserving the anonymity between traders.
Second, the contracts are highly standardized.
For example, a futures contract for wheat
specifies the particular variety of the wheat,
how many bushels of wheat are included
in the contract, delivery dates and locations, contract price
increments, and so forth.
This standardization across this relatively small number
of contracts has the advantage that it concentrates volume
and thereby increases contract liquidity.
The disadvantage is that the match
between a contract and the asset being hedged often
is then imperfect.
That is, futures contracts are often used to cross hedge,
giving rise to the basis risk that we talked about last time.
Just to give an example, imagine a farmer who's
hedging her durum wheat crop might
choose to hedge with a short position in a contract
based on soft red winter wheat because the price
changes between those two types of wheats
are highly correlated.
But there's only a futures contract
on the red winter wheat.
The basis risk then is that the prices
of durum wheat and red wheat may not move in tandem,
and that will reduce the effectiveness of the hedge.
A third special feature of futures contracts
is that they're marked to market at least once
every day in a process known as daily settlement.
A trader entering into a futures contract
must put up margin in the form of cash for securities.
The margin is held as collateral by the Exchange.
And as the futures price for the contract changes,
the daily gains or loss are transferred
between the accounts of the corresponding long and short
positions.
If a trader's margin account falls below a threshold
level called the maintenance margin,
the trader must add additional margin
or the Exchange will close out the position.
The combination of margin requirements
and daily settlement greatly reduce the credit risk exposure
of the Exchange and protect market participants
against default risk.
As it turns out, most futures contracts
are closed out prior to maturity.
That could be for several reasons.
One is that the horizon over which
the risk needs to be managed is different than the contract
maturity.
Contracts may also be closed out early
to avoid physical settlement.
Going back to our wheat example, a trader
might want to speculate on higher than expected demand
or bad weather causing wheat prices to rise,
but the speculator doesn't want to take delivery
of $5,000 bushels of wheat.
Contracts are closed out prior to expiration
by taking an offsetting position in the same contract.
For instance, if you're long in 10 corn contracts
expiring in April, you can take a short position
and 10 identical contracts.
The Exchange has a record of both transactions.
And they cancel against each other
through the clearing process.
