
PROFESSOR: One very popular futures
contract is the S&P 500 e-mini contract that's
traded at the CME electronically through its Globex platform.
As the name suggests, it's a contract
that has a payoff linked to the value of the S&P 500 stock
index.
The long side of the contract gains
when the S&P 500 index rises and conversely, the short side
wins if the price of the S&P 500 index falls.
You can learn about the contract's details
by going to the link shown on this slide.
The contract allows traders to obtain highly leveraged longer
short exposure to the S&P 500 using a liquid contract that's
cash-settled.
The contract is described as mini
because it's based on just $50 times the S&P 500 Index value,
making it attractive even to non-institutional traders.
The futures price for an S&P 500 futures contract
will be determined by the forward price
formula for stocks with a continuous dividend that
was introduced last time.
The futures price will depend on the current level
of the index, the risk-free interest rate, and the dividend
yield on the S&P 500.
Because the interest rate and dividend yield
tend to be fairly stable over time,
the primary factor affecting the contract price
and its movements are changes in the spot S&P 500 Index.
The snapshot of information shown here
is available online and updated very frequently.
You can see that there are listed contracts
that expire every three months, and that trading
is most active in the contract that's closest to expiration.
In this case, that's the March 2021 contract.
Options on the futures contracts are also available,
and we'll discuss those in a future class.

It's interesting to look at a new contract
and the motivations behind introducing it.
Several exchanges, including the CME,
have recently launched Bitcoin futures.
From the perspective, both of the exchange
and of market participants, introducing
this product has many attractive features.
Clearly, there's great investor interest in Bitcoin,
both among individual traders and, more recently,
among financial institutions.
And whereas trading directly in Bitcoin can be problematic,
the futures contracts provide Bitcoin exposure
without having to physically invest in it.
That is, the contract is cash-settled in dollars,
and so doesn't involve any direct Bitcoin transactions.
In addition, it allows investors to take short positions
in Bitcoin, something that's difficult or perhaps impossible
in the current cash market.
Introducing a Bitcoin contract also
created some risks and challenges for the exchange.
Because there isn't a single reliable source
for Bitcoin spot price quotations,
pricing could be distorted.
The high volatility of Bitcoin makes
trading in the futures contracts very risky,
especially for small and inexperienced traders.
That creates some reputational risk
for the exchange, which could be seen as taking advantage
of unsophisticated investors.
And as with any new product, there's
the risk that demand for it just won't be there.
But as it turns out, Bitcoin futures
are proving to be very popular.
Similar to the S&P 500 contract, the greatest volume
is in the contract closest to expiration.
Note that volume measures the number of contracts that
are traded in a single day.
A related statistic that's also shown here
is called open interest.
Open interest is a measure of the total number
of outstanding contracts, and it's
interpreted as a measure of the depth of the market.
