
PROFESSOR: Before we move on, it's worthwhile for us
to go over some of the mechanics of futures markets in a little
more detail.
Remember that traders and futures
have to post margin that serves as insurance that they'll
honor their commitments under the contract.
Gains and losses are settled daily
between the long and short sides of the contract.
Example 2.5 here shows how this works
in the context of a December gold futures contract.
Let's consider an investor who takes a long position in two
of these contracts.
Assume that each contract is for 100 ounces of gold,
and that the futures price is $1,250 per ounce
on the date when the investor enters the contract.
The initial margin requirement is
set by the exchange at $6,000 per contract.
So the margin requirement initially is $12,000 in total.
There's also something called a maintenance margin
of $4,500 per contract, which represents the minimum that
must be maintained in each trader's margin
account over time.

More generally, margin requirements
are going to differ across different types of contracts,
and they'll be set depending on the volatility
of the underlying asset and the contract size.
This table shows how the balance in the margin
account evolves over time is a function of a particular path
of futures settlement prices.
At the end of the first day, the price has decreased to $1,241,
from the initial price of $1,250 per ounce.
The loss on a long position is the difference
of $1,250 minus $1,241, times the 100 ounces in a contract,
or $900 per contract.
The total loss is $1,800 then, on the two contracts.

Correspondingly, the margin balance
goes from the initial $12,000 down to $10,200, corresponding
to the $1,800 loss.
The remaining $10,200 is higher than the required
total maintenance margin of $9,000,
so no additional funds are required.
Now let's go forward to day six and assume the settlement price
is $1,236.20 per ounce.
That implies a margin balance of $9,240.
That's also consistent with subtracting the cumulative loss
up to that date from the initial margin.
Well now, a further price drop on day seven
implies a further loss of $1,260.
This brings the margin account down to $7,980,
and that's below the maintenance margin of $9,000.
To maintain an open position, the trader
has to deposit an additional $4,020 into the margin account
to restore it to the initial margin requirement of $12,000.
The margin account continues to rise and fall
with the price of gold and you can
imagine the position is closed out on day 16
at the then current price of $1,226.90 per ounce.
The trader withdraws the remaining money
in the margin account.

We've seen that futures exchanges, which
serve as clearing houses and central counterparties,
or CCPs, play a central role in futures markets.
This diagram goes a little more deeply into the structure
of a futures trade.
A retail futures trader would typically place a buy
or sell order through a broker, who in turn would submit it
to a clearing member.
The clearing house member, which is often
a large financial institution, would
execute the trade via the clearing house
with another clearing member, representing
the client wanting to enter the other side of the same trade.
The margin accounts would be kept in safekeeping
at the clearing house.
Default risk is minimal, not only
because of the margin accounts, which
we've talked about before, but also
because of the added protection from capital reserves
held by the clearing house and the contractual obligation
of clearing members to absorb residual losses.

During the severe 2008 financial crisis,
heightened counterparty risk and concern about default
caused severe market disruptions and price spikes.
To try to avoid those problems arising in the future,
regulators required that many common derivatives
transactions, that traditionally had been conducted
in bilateral over-the-counter markets,
be moved into clearinghouses where
default risk is much lower.
Those changes have probably made the markets safer overall.
However, the concentration of trades
into a limited number of large clearing houses
has made those institutions themselves
a source of systemic risk and a target
for tighter regulatory scrutiny.

I've emphasized that futures contracts are a particular type
of forward contract.
A natural question you might have
is whether the special institutions
of futures markets, particularly the requirements of posting
margin and marking to market daily,
has any effect on the relative price of otherwise similar
forward and futures contracts.
As a practical matter, the formulas
that we derive for the price and forward contracts
are commonly used for futures contracts too.
Theoretically, one can prove that the two prices
should be identical in a constant interest rate
environment.
When interest rates aren't constant,
small differences arise because of margin account dynamics
and the correlation between the value of the underlying asset
and interest rates.
Those differences are greater in high interest rate environments
and smaller when forward contracts also
are collateralized.
For the purpose of this class, and also
in most practical situations, the prices
can be treated as essentially identical.
