
PROFESSOR: As usual, let's start with the basics.
A swap contract specifies an exchange
of payments between two counterparties
on one or more future dates where the payment size depends
on the difference between two reference prices or interest
rates.
Like futures contracts, swaps are
one kind of forward contract.
In fact, a single payment swap is
equivalent to a cash settled forward contract.
A multiple payment swap is like a package
of individual forward contracts, each maturing
on a different date.
A swap can be used either to hedge
or to speculate on the stream of risky cash flows.
And as for other derivatives, whether it's
considered hedging or speculating
depends on the rest of an investor's portfolio
and whether the swap transaction serves to decrease or increase
the net risk.

Interest rate swaps make up the largest part
of the swap market.
The contracts are primarily used by financial institutions
seeking to manage their exposure to interest rate risk.
That includes commercial investment
in mortgage banks, hedge funds, and fixed income portfolio
managers.
In what's called a plain vanilla interest rate swap,
there's a periodic exchange of cash
over the life of the contract based
on the difference between the realization of a floating
reference rate and a preset fixed rate,
and based on a notional principal or contract size,
say, a million dollars.
So for example, a contract might specify
that a fixed rate of 10% will be exchanged annually
for a floating payment based on one-year LIBOR
over a period of five years.
LIBOR stands for the London Inter-Bank Offered Rate.
It's a rate at which banks report
they're willing to lend to other high quality banks for a given
maturity.
Because of the serious problems that
arose with LIBOR reporting during the financial crisis,
regulators have mandated that LIBOR be phased out by 2022
and replaced with more reliable benchmarks.
A leading replacement in the US is
SOFR, which stands for the Secured Overnight Funding Rate.
As with LIBOR, its purpose in the context of the swap market
is to provide a short term reference
rate over the life of the swap contract.
Another useful and related piece of terminology
is that an interest rate swap can
be described as a package of contracts known as forward rate
agreements or FRAs.
In a forward rate agreement, a pre-specified fixed interest
rate payment is exchanged for a payment that
depends on a floating rate.
The absence of arbitrage opportunities
means that swaps, forward rate agreements, futures contracts,
and interest rates, and the cash bond market, all
must be priced consistently.
We've already been using the basic terminology
for plain vanilla interest rate swaps,
but it's useful to summarize.
The notional principle is the basis
for calculating the fixed and floating interest rate.
It's called notional because there's no actual exchange
of principle amounts.
There are two counterparties to the swap, one on each side.
The fixed rate payer pays the fixed rate
that's pre-specified in the contract,
and receives the floating rate.
As a matter of convention, the fixed rate payer
is said to have bought the swap or as long the swap.
You can think of the swap as being
a long position in the underlying interest rates.
It becomes more valuable as market interest rates go up.
The floating rate payer pays the floating rate
and receives the fixed rate, and is said to be short the swap.
Again, this can be understood as a short position in the market
interest rate so that there's a gain when rates go down.
