
PROFESSOR: We're now going to go through the logic of how
the fixed rate on a plain vanilla swap is determined.
It also involves no-arbitrage logic,
but it's a little bit more complicated than what
we've done up to this point.
The diagram here represents the cash
flows in a swap from the perspective of the floating
rate payer.
Notice that the diagram is drawn as
if principal payments are exchanged, even though they're
not.
That is, the notional principal, denoted here by a capital F,
is assumed to be exchanged along with the final interest-based
payment at the final date, N. The minus F and plus F
cancel out, reflecting that no principal is actually
exchanged.
The advantage of this representation
is that it simplifies the valuation calculation
by highlighting the swap is equivalent to holding
two positions.
The first is a long position in a fixed rate bond,
with a coupon rate c equal to the fixed rate specified
in the swap contract.
Those generate the payments c times F, c times F, c times F,
c times F, all the way out to the final c
times F payment at time N.
The second position is a short position
in a floating rate bond.
The floating rate is indexed by a subscript representing
the time the rate is locked in, which
is always one period before the money is paid out.
For example, the floating rate paid
at the first exchange of payments,
r0 is based on the rate in the market as of time 0.
The rate at time 1 is determined here, but paid at time 2,
and so forth.

That generates a sequence of floating rate payments,
F times r0, F times r1, F times r2, all the way out to F times
rN minus 1.

As with other foreign contracts, the payoffs
on every future date are zero-sum
between the long and short side of a swap.
Since it's costless to enter into the swap
and both counterparties do it voluntarily,
it has to be that the swap terms are
set so the net present value of the promised payments are 0.
Let's think for a second about why that is.
Well, it's the usual reason with forward contracts
that if the NPV were positive for one counterparty,
it would be negative for the other one.
And the counterparty with the negative NPV
would not agree to the swap terms.
This idea, together with what we will
see about the value of a floating rate bond,
will tie down the fixed rate on a swap.

A key ingredient to be able to price swaps
is to understand the price dynamics of safe floating rate
bonds.
You already know that for fixed rate bonds, when
interest rates go up, the price goes down
because the fixed future payments are discounted
at a new higher rate.
For floating rate bonds, the price behavior
when interest rates change is quite different than for coupon
bonds.
In fact, floating rate bonds always
price at par, or face value, on reset dates.
Intuitively, the reason that the price of floating rate bonds
is relatively insensitive to interest rate changes is this.
With a variable rate, if interest rates go up,
so do future interest payments.
Hence, the interest payment does the work
of bringing the yield up to the current market level
without the need for the price to adjust.

The rest of the algebra you see on this slide
is a proof that the price is equal to par on reset dates.
You can take a look if you're interested,
but you're only responsible for knowing the fact
that the price is par on the reset dates.
Between reset dates, the price of a floating rate bond
does move inversely to interest rates.
But because only the next payment is locked in,
and it will be made soon, the price effects tend to be small.

Another fact that you might want to know about floating rate
bonds is that they are very similar from the perspective
of the borrower to a strategy of rolling over a short-term debt.
A possible advantage of floating rate bonds
is that they avoid the issuance costs of repeatedly issuing
short-term debt.
However, because the bonds may be
less liquid than short-term debt,
the rates charged may be somewhat higher.

Now that we know how floating rate bonds are priced,
we can return to the question of how swap rates are determined
on a new swap contract.
As I mentioned earlier, because the swap is a zero-sum contract
and must be fair to both counterparties,
it has to be the case that the present value of the fixed rate
payments equal the present value of the floating rate payments.
We know that the floating rate payments
when represented as a floating rate bond will price at par.
That means that the fixed rate payments,
when represented as a coupon bond, must also price at par.
Together, that implies that the fixed rate on the swap
is determined by setting the present value
of the future fixed rate payments equal to par.

But looking back at our earlier representation, what we're
saying here is that the price or the present value
of the fixed rate payments has to be
equal to F, the face or par value,
and we're going to need to solve for the coupon rate that makes
that the case.

The final important step to understand swap pricing
is to tie the swap rate back to the spot yield curve.
Remember that the spot yield curve provides a discount rate
for cash flows arriving at different future times.

We can then write down an expression
that equates to par value of the notional fixed rate bond
to the present value of the promised fixed rate payments,
where the coupon rate c now is a free variable.

Since the notional principal F cancels
from both sides of this equation,
and if we can observe the appropriate yield curve,
then we can solve for the fixed rate c that makes this
a quality hold.

In practice, the appropriate rates
for discounting swap payments may
be somewhat different than a treasury yield curve, which
reflects that the two markets are
identical in terms of liquidity or risk
or taxes or other factors.
To adjust for this market participants
use a swap spot yield curve for swap pricing.
The swap yield curve is determined from market swap
prices, just as the treasury yield
curve is determined by the market
price of Treasury securities.
Two final observations-- first we've
seen that, to eliminate arbitrage opportunities,
swaps are priced to be consistent
with the appropriate yield curve, which
means the pricing is also consistent with the implied
forward rates in that yield curve with forward rate
agreements and with other interest rate forward
and futures contracts.
Second, the value of a swap changes over time
as market conditions evolve.
After a swap is initiated and if interest rates have changed,
the present value of the fixed rate payments
will no longer equal the value of the floating rate payments.
For instance, if rates fall, the floating rate payer
will benefit because the fixed rate payments received
won't be affected, but the floating rate payments
made will be lower.
