
PROFESSOR: One of the most common uses of swaps
is by financial institutions that
want to hedge the maturity mismatch between the asset
and liability sides of their balance sheet.
We'll consider the example of Southwest Savings Bank.
This is one of my favorite examples
for illustrating the importance of interest rate
risk for banks, how swaps and futures are alternative ways
to hedge against it, and how swap contracts have been
engineered and evolved over time to better help
banks address these goals.
Like many savings banks, Southwest
can fund its investment relatively inexpensively using
short term deposit funding.
Depositors like the safety and liquidity
of holding their money in a bank.
Thus, deposits make up the majority of its liabilities.
It also has some equity that serves
as a buffer against fluctuations in the value of its assets.
On the asset side of the balance sheet,
it specializes in funding mortgages,
which let's assume have a maturity of 10 years.

Well, let's imagine that the managers of Southwest
decide to invest $1 million into new 10 year mortgages funded
with three month time deposits.
Say the mortgages carry a 10% interest rate,
and the three month time deposits earn 8%.
For the first three months, the bank
has locked in an attractive 2% spread
between the mortgage rate it earns
and the deposit rate it pays.
Clearly, though, this is a very risky balance sheet.
The risk can be understood by considering the future cash
flows.
If interest rates rise, the mortgages
will continue to pay 10%, but the new deposits
will carry a higher rate, possibly exceeding the 10%
earned on the mortgages.
The risk can also be understood as having an immediate effect
in terms of the market value or present value of the balance
sheet.
That is, if rates rise, the market value of the 10 year
mortgages will fall considerably more
than the market value of the three month time deposits.
That means that an increase in interest rates
will erode the value of equity, potentially
causing financial distress or causing the bank
to be in violation of regulatory capital requirements.
There are several ways to hedge this risk exposure.
We'll compare two popular approaches: futures contracts
and interest rate swaps.

Hedging with a strip of short term interest rate futures
is one way to offset Southwest's interest rate risk exposure.
Active short term interest rate futures contract currently
include the three month LIBOR and three month SOFR contracts.
Looking at the information in this table,
the quoted price is used to find the forward interest
rate that can be locked in.
The annualized rate is just 100 minus the quoted price.
So if the price is given as 92, the rate is 8%.

Well, to lock in future borrowing rates
beyond the first three months covered by the initial time
deposits, the bank would short a sequence of contracts,
sizing the position to minimize the risk with a hedge ratio.
The short position generates gains
proportional to the increase in rates
offsetting the future higher interest
rates in the cash market and the losses that they generate.
Specifically, if the contract is based
on a principal amount of $1 million,
the bank would short one of each of these contracts.
While this strategy can provide a decent hedge,
it has some drawbacks.
One is that it involves a large number of contracts.
The second is that liquidity tends to decline rapidly
for longer dated contracts, as can be seen from the declining
open interest.
That reduced liquidity may increase the cost of the hedge.
Hedging mortgages is also complicated by the fact
that they may be prepaid.
And there is considerable uncertainty
about what that rate of prepayment will be.
That uncertainty will degrade the effectiveness of the hedge,
because it's likely that the hedge will turn out
to be too big or too small.

An alternative is for Southwest to hedge using
a 10 year interest rate swap.
Southwest would enter as the fixed rate payer, using
the income received from the mortgages
to cover its swap payout obligations.
It would be the floating rate receiver
and would use the income from the swap to pay its depositors.
It's protected from rising deposit rates by the increasing
swap income from the floating payments it receives.
Specifically, imagine that it enters
into a 10 year swap that matches the maturity of the mortgages.
As the fixed rate payer, it pays a rate
that was determined competitively
in the swap market, as we discussed earlier.
The floating rate is indexed to LIBOR, a common index
rate for swaps, and the payment frequency
is set to be semi-annual, which is also
a common frequency for plain vanilla interest rate swaps.

Both the strip of short futures and the interest rate swap
would serve to protect the bank from rising interest rates.
However, the swap contract has a few advantages over futures.
There's only one swap contract.
It covers the entire 10 year period, avoiding illiquidity
and long dated futures, and the more flexible timing
means that the contract can better match the maturity
dates of the time deposits.
However, this plain vanilla swap is still not a perfect hedge
for Southwest.
Whereas the notional principle of the swap is constant,
the mortgage principal will decline over time
with amortization.
There's likely to be a mismatch between the timing of mortgage
payments that are received monthly
and the swap payments that are made semi-annually.
The rate paid to depositors may not track the LIBOR reference
rate in the swap.
The uncertainty about prepayment speeds
means the bank is likely to be over- or under-hedged
in the future.

All of these problems can be addressed with customized swaps
that use financial engineering to provide users
with a more reliable hedge.
Amortizing swaps are based on a notional principle balance
that declines over time.
In this case, the amortization schedule
can be set to match the normal mortgage amortization schedule.
Basis swaps are an exchange of payments
where each side is based on a different reference index.
A basis swap could be used to hedge
the timing difference between the mortgage cash inflows
and the swap fixed rate outflows.
Another basis swap could be used to hedge
the difference between the deposit rates and the LIBOR
rates.
Finally, the prepayment risk could be hedged
with the use of a swaption.
A swaption is an option embedded in a swap contract.
Type of swaption that would help Southwest in this situation
would allow it to cancel the swap
at any time of its choosing, thereby
allowing it to take off the hedge if the mortgages are
prepaid.
While each of these custom features
makes for a much better hedge, but it
adds to the cost of the hedge.
Depending on its risk tolerance, Southwest
might prefer the partial protection offered
by a plain vanilla interest rate swap,
or it may choose to add some of these other features
to improve the quality of its hedge.
