
PROFESSOR: Next, we're going to turn
to some other important types of swaps.
We'll start with a deep dive into currency swaps.
After interest rates, the second most widely used type
of swap contract involves periodically exchanging
a payment in one currency for a payment in a second currency.
These are known as currency or FX swaps.

A currency swap contract may call
for fixed or floating payments or a combination of the two.
As for interest rate swaps, there's
some underlying principle amount that determines
the size of the payments.
But whereas for interest rates the principle is notional
and never exchanged between the two counterparties,
with currency swaps the contract may also
call for an exchange of principle
in the two currencies.
A fixed-for-fixed currency swap is like a portfolio
of forward currency contracts.
As such, these contracts are widely
used by corporations and financial institutions
to hedge currency exposures arising
from international trade and cross-border borrowing
and lending transactions.

Let's go back to our example of a US exporter hedging currency
risk exposure.
But now imagine that instead of receiving a lump
sum of 5 million euros in six months from its client,
the agreement calls for the client making
five equal installment payments of 1 million euros paid
every six months for the next 2 and 1/2 years.
The exporter could hedge each individual installment
with a separate currency futures or forward contract.
Alternatively, a single currency swap contract
could be used to hedge the exposure.
Well, let's first review how we can find the forward rates that
would be locked in for each installment payment
individually.
Recall that the initial spot exchange
rate was assumed to be $1.2673 per euro,
that the dollar interest rate is 5%,
and that the euro interest rate is 3%.
And let's assume the term structure
is flat at these rates in both currencies.
With this information, we can use our formula
for the forward exchange rate for future delivery dates
in six months, one year, et cetera,
going out 2 and 1/2 years.
You should check that you agree with the outcomes that
are listed in this table.

Alternatively, the US firm can hedge with a currency swap.
The swap could specify that the firm pays 1 million euros
every six months for 2 and 1/2 years to a bank counterparty
in exchange for a pre-specified swap rate of k,
where we'll say K is 1.306.
And we'll see where the 1.306 comes
from in just a little while.
Well, what's the net dollar cash flow
for the US firm on each date?
That's determined by a combination of the swap
transactions and selling the euro's
received in the spot market.

Specifically, at each swap payment date
the firm receives a million times K dollars in exchange
for giving up 1 million euros.
The euros paid in the swap are worth a million euros
times the spot exchange rate, S sub T, of dollars per euro.
The net amount received in the swamp
which is cash settled then is a million times K minus S sub T.
The firm also sells the million euros received
from its client in the spot market
at the current exchange rate, S sub T again.
The net inflow to the firm is a certain one million
times the fixed swap rate, K.
We took the swap rate in this example to be 1.306.
Now let's see where that number actually comes from.
I think you won't be surprised to hear that it's nailed down
by a no-arbitrage condition, in this case between currency
forward rates and currency swap rates.
As for interest rate swaps and other forwards and futures
contracts, the initial value of the swap
must be 0 from the perspective of both counterparties.
The swap rate K is chosen to make that happen.

To infer the rate K, we can set up a portfolio with two pieces.
The first swap of 1 million euros for $1 million
times K dollars.
We know from before that the payoff in dollar terms
at each future date, T is one million times
K minus the spot rate on that date.
The second piece of this portfolio
is a set of forward contracts that
specify an exchange of a million times
the forward exchange rate at time T
dollars for a million euros on each of those future payment
dates also.
In dollar terms, the euros received
in the forward contract at each payment date
will be worth 1 million times the spot exchange rate.

Putting these two components together,
the portfolio payoff at every payment date
simplifies just to $1 million times K minus the forward rate.
Well, now notice that the payoffs are certain dollar
amounts.
We know K We know those forward rates.
And hence, we can value them by discounting
at the risk-free rate along the yield curve
for the appropriate maturity.
The present value of the cash flows
can then be written as the discounted sum shown
on this slide, where we've represented the discount rates
here on a continuous basis.

We also know that because it's free to enter
the forward position and the swap position,
the value of the portfolio must be equal to 0.
So we can set the expression for the present value
of the portfolio equal to 0, rearrange it,
and solve for the fixed swap rate K that makes it true.

Looking at this resulting formula,
we can see that K is a present value
weighted average of the forward exchange
rates on future payment dates.

That expression for K can be represented entirely
in terms of dollar and euro interest rates
by substituting the formula for the forward rate
for each payment date into the expression we just
derived for K. This representation leads
to the interpretation that the currency swap rate equals
the current exchange rate multiplied
by an expression based on a ratio
of the relative risk-free borrowing costs in the two
currencies.

I want to revisit the comparison between hedging
using a sequence of forward contracts
and with a single swap.
Both methods completely eliminate the exchange rate
uncertainty, and both generate cash flows
with identical present values.
However, the two strategies differ in their cash flow
profiles.
Whereas the swap provides level payments,
the forward contract initially locks in lower cash flows
and later on higher ones.
One's preference for one pattern of cash flows over the other
might influence the choice between the contracts.
Other considerations in choosing between them
include any differences in transactions costs,
availability, and collateral requirements.