
PROFESSOR: Commodity swaps are another useful tool
for risk management.
A commodity swap is an agreement to periodically exchange
a pre-specified fixed payment for a payment linked
to the current market price of a commodity.
That makes these swaps equivalent to a portfolio
of commodity forward contracts, each
with the same forward price.
These agreements are usually cash-settled,
although a contract could specify physical delivery.
Because oil is an important input into many products,
and because its price can be very volatile,
commodity swaps based on oil prices are quite common.
Let's consider a company that will
need to buy 100,000 barrels of oil in one and two years.
We know that there's active forwards in the futures markets
in oil, and let's assume that in those markets today,
we can see that the forward price of oil
is $110 per barrel for delivery in one year,
and it's $111 per barrel for delivery in two years.
Also, let's assume that the one and two year interest rates
are 6% and 6.5% respectively, both on a simple interest rate
basis.
From this information, then we know
that using forwards or futures the company can lock
in a purchase price per barrel needed over the next two years,
for a present value cost of $201.638.
That comes from discounting the first year price we lock in
per barrel at the one year 6% rate,
and the two year price we said we could lock in
at the 6.5% rate.
Using the now familiar no-arbitrage reasoning
that a swap must lock in prices that
are consistent in present value terms with what can be locked
in forward contracts, and recognizing
that a swap typically calls for level fixed payments,
we can solve for x in this equation to get the swap rate.

You can verify the two year no-arbitrage swap
price per barrel is $110.483.
This example is also a convenient setup
to demonstrate that swaps are equivalent to a package
in forward contracts coupled with borrowing and lending
money.
Consider the swap price of $110.483 per barrel,
versus the forward prices, which we saw
were $110 for delivery in one year
and $111 for delivery in two years per barrel.
Relative to this forward curve, we're
overpaying $0.483 at the end of the first year,
and we're underpaying $0.571 at the end of the second year.
Thus, by entering into the swap, we're
effectively lending the counterparty money
for one year, starting at the end of the first year.
The implied interest rate on this implicit loan
is the 0.517 divided by 0.483, minus 1, which gives us 7%.

We also had the information that the one and two year
zero coupon bond yields were 6% and 6.5% respectively.
You can calculate the implied forward rate
from this information between years 1 and 2,
and you'll find that it's also 7%.
You should verify that for yourself.
This highlights a general property
with swaps, which is that fairly priced swaps have embedded
borrowing and lending rates equal to the implied forward
rates and the yield curve.
Consistency of forward and swap contract
prices with implied forward rates in the yield curve
is another no-arbitrage relationship
that must always hold, at least within transaction's cost
bounds.
This oil swap example is also a good place
to pause and confirm that physical settlement of a swap
contract is equivalent to financial settlement paired
with particular cash transactions.
With physical settlement on each payment date, in this example,
the specified quantity of oil is exchanged for the fixed swap
price.

The buyer receives the oil and pays $110.483 per barrel
under the contract.
Now with financial settlement, the amount
of cash received by the oil buyer in the swap
will be the difference between the spot
price at an exchange date, which is stochastic,
and the fixed swap price.

The oil buyer can then go and buy the oil on the same day
in the spot market, paying the spot price.
The gain or loss on the swap just
offsets the difference between the spot price of oil
and the fixed swap price.
And on net, the oil buyer winds up paying $110.482 per barrel
on each payment date.
