
PROFESSOR: The final category of swaps
I want to introduce you to are called
total rate of return swaps.
These total rate of return swaps are a versatile tool to gain
or offload customized risk exposure to just about
any asset you can imagine.
They're particularly popular tools
for hedge funds wanting to gain leveraged risk
exposures to assets that might be illiquid or hard to obtain
directly.
In a total rate of return swap, on each payment date,
the total rate of return payer must pay the receiver
the entire return on the notional value of the reference
asset since the last reset or payment date.
This includes any interest or dividend payments, and also
any capital gain or loss.
The total return can therefore be negative.
And in exchange for that total rate of return,
the receiver pays an interest rate, usually based
on a floating reference rate such as LIBOR or SOFR.
And there may be a spread over that reference rate.
As with most swaps, usually only the net amount is transferred.

As with other swaps, total rate of return swaps
have a fixed maturity date.
That maturity date might not be equal to the reference asset,
and therefore the swaps allow flexibility
in length of the exposure to the reference asset
without requiring any transaction
involving the asset itself.
The reference asset, as I mentioned before,
could be just about anything where returns
are observable and verifiable.
They could be bonds, loans, emerging market equities,
sovereign debt, mortgage backed securities, equities,
commodities, and so forth.
Note too that the payer need not own the reference asset.
If the payer does own the asset, the swap
offloads the risk onto the receiver and serves as a hedge.
When the payer doesn't own the reference asset,
the swap is effectively a speculative short position
on the asset, a bet that the total return
will be less than the interest rate paid in the contract.

As a quick comprehension check, let's consider the example
of a total rate of return swap with notional principle
of $10 million where the receiver pays LIBOR flat.
Assume that the reference asset earned negative 10%
over the period since the last reset date,
and that the LIBOR rate on the last reset date was 4.5%.
What's the net cash flow on the swap?

The answer is that the total rate of return payer
pays minus 10% and receives 4.5%.
Paying minus 10% is the same as receiving 10%.
So in total, the total rate of return payer receives 14.5%.
The total rate of return receiver loses 14.5%.
The swap is zero-sum.

Total rate of return swap pricing
is surprisingly straightforward, because we
can break down the swap into pieces
that are each easy to price.
From the payer's perspective, initially and at the beginning
of every subsequent reset date, the swap
is equivalent to a short position in the risky reference
asset, and the long position in a floating rate
bond, in amounts equal to the notional principle.
From the receiver's perspective, it's
like being long in a risky reference asset and short
in the floating rate bond, both again of equal value.
This implies that the net value of the swap
is always zero at a reset date.
Between reset dates, the value will
fluctuate with changes in the present value of the reference
asset and with the present value of the floating rate bond.

It's useful to understand a little bit more
about the ways in which these contracts are commonly used.
Let's start with the motivations of total rate
of return receivers.
These are often hedge funds seeking exposures
to an asset class that may be illiquid or otherwise
difficult to access directly.
Financial institutions may also use these swaps
to obtain a particular risk exposure
that they prefer to keep off their balance sheets.
Generally, indirect exposure through a swap contract
may be less costly in terms of administrative and transactions
costs.
For example, imagine a hedge fund manager
that would like to gain exposure to equities in an emerging
market.
But that market may have strict capital controls
and very weak protection for foreign investors.
Through a total rate of return swap,
the manager can benefit from the expected gains from the risk
exposure while avoiding the costs and risks
of physical ownership.
A feature that makes total rate of return swaps
attractive, particularly to hedge funds, but also sometimes
dangerous, is the very high leverage
implicit in these contracts.
As for other derivatives, the implicit leverage
is reduced when capital is required to ensure performance,
as we'll see in the next example.
It's easiest to understand the implicit leverage
in a total rate of return swap from the perspective
of the receiver with an example.
Imagine that Hedge Fund A here is the total rate of return
receiver where the underlying asset has an expected
annual rate of return of 8.3%.

The current one year LIBOR rate is 5.8%,
implying that the spread over LIBOR on the risky reference
asset is 2.5%.

The total rate of return payer receives
LIBOR plus a spread of 1%, indicated here with a spread
to LIBOR of 1%.

The expected net spread over LIBOR for the receiver
then is 8.3% minus 1% minus 5.8%, or 1.5%.

Let's further assume that the hedge fund
has to put up 5% of the notional principal and collateral, which
from its perspective ties up that amount of its own equity
capital.
Then the implicit leverage is 100 to 5, or 20 to 1.

The collateral also earns interest
for the receiver while it's being held,
which is assumed here to be at the LIBOR rate of 5.8%.

Under those assumptions, the net expected return
is a very high 35.8%.
That estimate comes from the equation on the slide,
showing in the first term the expected total rate of return
on the reference asset of 8.3%, the interest payment
on the swap based on LIBOR plus 1%, or 6.8%,
and the LIBOR return on the collateral.
The reason that the total return is so high
is that it's based on the notional principle of 100,
but the equity tied up is just the collateral of 5 per 100.
This is then a highly leveraged position and a very risky one.
If the return on the reference asset
turns out to be lower than expected,
losses could turn out to be very large.
The second and third column of the table
confirmed that it's the leverage that creates
the high expected return.
If Hedge Fund B faces the same terms,
except that a collateral of 10% is required,
then the net expected return is 20.8% rather than
35.8 doing the same algebra.
And of course, for a cash investor
in the same asset with no leverage,
the expected return is 8.3%.

Finally, let's consider the possible motivations
of a total rate of return payer.
We've seen that the payer's position involves
a short position in the reference asset.
If the payer has a long cash position in that same asset,
the swap hedges that exposure.
Of course, an alternative way to hedge that cash exposure would
be to just liquidate the asset but an outright sale
could be undesirable for various reasons, such as high selling
costs or tax consequences.
Well, for an entity that doesn't own the reference asset
but believes its price is likely to drop,
the total rate of return swap offers a way
to take a short position.
If the price decline is expected to be temporary,
the maturity of the swap can be easily matched to that belief.

Being a payer in a total rate of return swap
is also very useful if an outright short position
is prohibited, either by policy or regulation,
or if it's hard to borrow an asset in order to short it.
Some of these scenarios that I've just described amount
to an accounting or regulatory arbitrage that's
using a derivative to get around a rule or regulation.
Whether such opportunities actually exist
is not assured, as regulators are
aware of these sorts of loopholes
and often try to close them down.

In any case, we've seen that a total rate of return swap
is a powerful tool for customizing and managing
risk exposures.
As with other swap products, most users
are financial institutions or large financial firms,
rather than individual investors.