
PROFESSOR: Let's look at a few examples of Ito processes.
Our first example is going to be a Brownian motion with drift.
Could this be a possible model for stock prices?
Let's take a look.
We'll define dS to be mu dt plus sigma dB,
where mu and sigma are both constants.
This is easy to integrate.
So suppose we start with this expression,
and now, let's just integrate each term, keeping in mind
that mu and sigma are constant.
So this will be from t equals 0 to big T.
And if we integrate on the left-hand side,
we just get St minus S at time 0 is equal to mu times
T plus sigma times BT, or, to be precise,
if we might have had some non-zero constant,
we could have this here.
So that's-- we've integrated an Ito process, and there we go.
We see that it has a linear growth with time
from the first term, and the second term
represents-- this term here represents a random variable,
so that the final destination of ST is unknown,
but BT, as we know, is drawn-- or this difference
is drawn from a Gaussian distribution.

Now, this model has been considered
and generally rejected for purposes of stock prices.
It was the first model considered by Bachelier in 1900
for a theory for option pricing.
But the biggest complaint about it,
generally, is that it allows prices
to go negative with positive probability, something
that stocks can't do since stocks have limited liability.
So this is generally the preferred model.
And this geometric Brownian motion,
this continuous-time version of our log-normal process,
is the standard model for stock prices.
That doesn't mean it's right.
It means that it's the reference model.
Whether it's right or not, how well it works,
remains to be seen by looking at data
and by looking at applications.
But let's take a look at this now
as an application of Ito's lemma.
So we begin with this form, where
this looks similar to what we had before, but notice
I've multiplied through--
on the right-hand side, each of these terms has an extra S.
So my coefficient function a, little a and little b,
is mu S over here and sigma S over here.
So let's take a look at this as an application of Ito's lemma.
So here's our expression where I've
divided through by S. In this form,
we can see that what's a--

Brownian motion generalized is the quantity dS over S.
But notice we can't integrate that immediately because it's
not an exact differential.
It's a differential divided by S. If it were d of something,
then we'd be done, and that's our goal.
So I got this by taking dS is mu S dt plus sigma S
dB, which is of the form, of course,
a dt plus sigma, excuse me, plus b dB.
So we have that a, in this case, is mu S and b is sigma S.
And now we'd like to apply Ito's lemma.
So it would be convenient to have that.
Luckily, it's right up here.
Let's bring it down.
So here's Ito's lemma, and let's take a look
at how we can apply it to this situation.
Notice that the B squared here is
going to be replaced by this value here, by sigma S squared.
So I've written this in terms of S down here instead of x,
and what should we use for F?
The f that we're going to be interested in
is the logarithm of the stock price for the same reasons
that we've talked about earlier and when we looked
at discrete-time processes.
So let's go.
We have that F is equal to log S. Therefore,
the partial of F with respect to t is 0.
That was easy.
Partial of F with respect to S is 1/S.
And the second partial of F with respect to S squared is minus 1
over S squared.
What does Ito's lemma say?
It says that dF, d of log S, is going to be, well, let's see.
Partial of F-- partial of F with respect to t is zero,
so I'm not going to have an immediate dt term.
I'm going to have a term which will be partial of F
with respect to S dS.
But that's going to be--
well, here, let's write it out in two steps.
This is going to be dF dS dS, plus our Ito term, which
is going to be little b squared, which
is sigma S over 2, second partial of F with respect
to S squared, times dt.
Now, let's substitute.
This is going to be 1/S dS plus sigma S
quantity squared over 2 times minus 1
over s squared times dt.
Now, remember that this first term right here
is dS/S, which is what we started with.
I think we have it way back here, dS/S. There it is,
right here.

So let's take this value for dS/S,
which is mu dt plus sigma B, and substitute it
in right over here, shall we?
So this is equal to mu dt plus sigma dB.
That's from this first term.
And now we have this second term where
I'm going to have an S squared and a minus 1 over S squared.
So that's going to give me minus sigma squared over 2 times dt.
So let's combine these and clean this all up.
This tells us that d of log S is equal to mu
minus sigma squared over 2.

Oops, changed our colors.

dt plus sigma dB.

So what have we done?
What we've accomplished right here
is that we've taken our original Ito process
and we've rewritten it.
Where we had dS/S, which was not an exact differential,
we've now been able to take the function log S and show
that it's an exact differential.
And on the right-hand side, we have something
which we can integrate.
So what we have is, if we do the integration, we have log ST/S0.
Since a difference of logs is the log of the ratio,
this is going to be mu minus sigma squared
over 2 times t plus sigma times BT minus B0,
just as we had before, if we want to integrate it.

So if we compare with our notes, we
see that we've taken this format here
and we've shown that log S is an exact differential.
It looks like a Brownian motion, so that the logarithm of S
behaves as a Brownian motion with the same volatility.
Notice that sigma is unchanged here, but we have sigma dB.
And over here, compared to our previous example
of an ordinary arithmetic Brownian motion with drift,
the sigma dB term is the same, and the
left-- on the first term, rather,
on the deterministic term, we have mu
shifted by sigma squared over 2.
So this piece here, mu minus sigma squared over 2--
we'll be seeing a bunch of minus sigma squared over 2's running
around in some other formulas.
This is where it comes from.
It comes from the Ito term in doing this change of variables.
Then finally, if we want to integrate things up
in finite form, we just exponentiate
the last expression that I wrote down.
This model has the virtue that it excludes negative prices.
So because the logarithm goes from minus infinity to infinity
and we're exponentiating the result,
we never get negative numbers.
The exponential is always positive.
This is potentially-- it has the opposite problem.
We don't get negative prices, but also,
prices that obey this can never reach 0,
and unfortunately, real companies sometimes do
have stock prices that go to 0.
So that's something that we should think about,
whether it's a good approximation or a good model
to apply to real-world prices.
The thing that we see in our original model,
we can actually see that without solving it.
How do we see that?
We noticed that because these coefficient functions
have an S on the right-hand side, that as S approaches 0,
the coefficients of dt and dB are going to 0.
That means that there's not a lot of motion
either deterministically or randomly.
As the stock price goes to 0, everything quiets down,
and that's partly how it avoids the origin.
Another common model is the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process,
which is a continuous-time analog of the mean reversion
process that we saw in discrete time that
looks like the AR 1 process.
Now, here's a case where we can learn
a lot about the solution to the equation
without actually solving anything.
Let's take a look.
First thing we notice is that if the lambda term were 0,
we would just have an ordinary random walk.
So the stochastic term is very, very simple.
What about the deterministic term?
Well, this is a restoring force.
So I've suggestively called the constant here lambda times
S bar.
And here's an S. This is our dynamic random variable,
the same one that appears in the left-hand side.
So how can we think about this equation?
This says that the change in S, dS, has a random component.
This is the shock here, which is unconnected with anything.
But if S is below S bar and lambda is positive,
then this will be a positive value.
And if S is above S bar, then this will be a negative value.
So depending on the sign of lambda, if it's positive,
we basically have the mean-reverting dynamics
that we saw before, that we move toward the mean value,
and we would expect that the long-term mean value is
going to be S bar.
Now, can we use this as a model for stock prices?
Well, on the one hand, it's got a random component that
allows drift, and there's no boundedness on S,
so S could get to be infinitely large.
It could get to be negative.
On the other hand, the first term acts as a restoring force.
It keeps things relatively tight near S bar.
So depending on the magnitude of lambda compared
to the magnitude of sigma, it might
be OK for certain periods of time as a good approximation,
but it does allow the possibility,
with finite probability, that prices could go negative.
It's not strictly forbidden.
So this is a model that's commonly
used for many processes.
Most notably, we'll take a look when
we think about models for interest rates.

Another model used for interest rates
is the Cox-Ingersoll-Ross process,
which looks a lot more complicated,
but really it's just one small modification
to the previous one, to the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process.
So if I take a look here, I see this is the mean reversion
term.
But now, notice that the volatility term
is modified by this square root of rho that's here.
So think of rho as being a rate, an interest rate type variable.
And what does the square root of rho do here?
Well, I have a restoring force near rho bar,
but this does say that if rho approaches 0
from above, that the volatility term gets very small.
So maybe we have a chance of avoiding the origin.
Notice that we absolutely can't have negative values of rho
in this model.
The first term doesn't have a problem,
but taking square roots of negative numbers
now gives us not just a financial problem because it's
a mathematical one too because we're not
going to find or want to find solutions
in the complex numbers.
So we can sometimes break this down by a little bit further
manipulation, and here's one more application
of Ito's lemma.
We can transform things to simplify the stochastic term
and move all of the complexity into the deterministic term.
The stochastic terms are the ones
that are genuinely new for what we're doing.
They're the ones we might want to Monte Carlo model.
The coefficients of dt, as complicated as they might be,
follow the domain of usual kinds of differentials
that we would look at and standard analytic functions we
might consider.
So let's just see what happens if we have this transformation.
So we compute the necessary derivatives.
If F is equal to the square root of rho,
the partial of F with respect to t vanishes.
The first partial of F with respect to rho
is 1 over 2 square root of rho.
The next partial derivative is minus 1/4 rho to the minus 3/2.
We substitute that into Ito's lemma,
and we find that we can write the result in this form.
dF has this expression, this coefficient function for dt,
plus now a newly simplified coefficient function for dB.
So now if we want to see about avoiding behavior
on the origin, we just need to study
the behavior of this term.
The stochastic term is constant.
So we have mean reversion dynamics
for an appropriate range of parameters.
We do avoid the origin.
And this model is one that's used
for taking a look at interest rates and at term structure.
