
PROFESSOR: We have all the tools we need now
to derive the Black-Scholes equation for option pricing
and for derivative pricing generally.
And the method in this case is just
as interesting as the result. We're
going to use the tools that we have with Ito's lemma,
and we're going to take stochastic differential
equations and reduce them to partial differential equations.
And the technique that we use is,
instead of trying to solve for the randomness,
we're going to eliminate it completely.
Let's see how that works.
Suppose we've got a function V, which,
think of V as standing for the value of a derivative function.
So let's let the underlying-- so for concreteness,
we can think of a stock option, say a standard call
or a put option.
So let V be the value of the option,
let S the value of the stock, generically
called the underlying, and a derivative is
something whose value depends on the value of something else.
So S is the stock price value, V is the value of our derivative,
t is our old friend time, and let's suppose
that the stock price follows geometric Brownian
motion, which we just solved.
So dS/S over S is mu dt plus sigma dB,
or if I multiply through by S, I have this expression here.
What about V?
Well let's write d--
So that's dS.
Let's write dV using Ito's lemma,
where we think of V as being a function of S,
and then S is this function of time and of randomness.
So applying Ito's lemma, we have dV is something times dt.
Now, I've grouped the Ito term here as a coefficient of dt,
so I have partial of V with respect
to t plus this term here, this sigma S, quantity
squared over 2.
That comes because of this sigma S,
so that shows up in the coefficient in the Ito term,
divided by 2, second partial of V with respect to S,
all of that times dt, plus partial of V with respect to S,
dS.
So that's just Ito's lemma applied to a generic function
V.
Now, let's combine the two in a portfolio.
So specifically, let's imagine that we're looking at the value
where we buy one option, and maybe we're
going to go short a certain number of shares.
Let's give that number a name.
Let's call it delta.
So the value of the portfolio is going
to be V, the value of the option,
plus the quantity of shares times the value of the shares.
Our quantity is going to be a negative quantity, so
minus delta, times the value of the shares.
So my portfolio value, which I'll designate by pi,
is V minus delta S. Now, I'm going
to start shifting around my portfolio a bit,
and the thing I'm going to change
is the amount of stock I own.
It's a lot easier to trade stock and a lot cheaper
and the market is much more liquid.
So I'm going to imagine I'm going to hold V fixed.
I'm going to hold the single option fixed.
If we had a different number, we could multiply this
all by some overall constant.
But I have one option which I'm long,
and I'm going to be short delta shares.
And therefore, the value of the portfolio
is going to be V minus delta S.
Let's look at this in differential form.
What happens as the stock price changes?
Well, the change in value of the portfolio, d pi,
is going to be dV minus delta dS.
So what do we know about dV and dS?
Well, for dV, we take this expression
that we have up here, and let's write it down below.
Notice that I have my dt term come straight down.
And then I have this extra term, partial of V with respect
to S times dS.
That comes over here.
And then I have this other term, which is much simpler
because it's stock itself.
It doesn't need any other partials.
So I have minus delta times dS.
So I've written the change in portfolio value
as an Ito process with something times dt plus something times
dS.
I don't need-- I could expand this dS out in terms of dB
if I wanted to, but it's actually
going to be a bit more convenient to leave it
right here.
So notice that the first term is deterministic.
The second term is stochastic because of the dS.
And gee, wouldn't it be nice if we could make that go away?
Well, we can.
Suppose that instead of dS vanishing, which
we can't do because it does obey this stochastic differential
equation, suppose we just multiply at time 0.
That is, suppose we choose delta to match dV/dS in such a way
that the coefficient is 0.

The stochastic term vanishes if we choose delta equals dV/dS.
That is-- that says that if we knew
the sensitivity of the price of the option
as the stock price changed, that would tell us
the number of shares to own.
So the right-hand side, in general, varies with time,
and so is going to be delta.
So there's no risk that's left over.
We've canceled out all of the risk,
but at the cost of having to keep
readjusting the number of shares that we have.
So as the market price changes, the exact number of shares
delta that we need changes.
And this is a strategy that's known as dynamic hedging.
So dynamic hedging means that we hold
a number of shares in relation to our option that's specified
in a very, very specific way.
Given all the values, I will know exactly how many shares
I need to trade.
But when things change, I will need to update those.
Having done that, though, there's
no risk in the portfolio because this term here vanishes
and d pi is just something times dt.
If there's no risk in the portfolio,
then the portfolio should earn the risk-free rate,
under penalty of arbitrage.
So it should be the case, then, that d pi should
grow at a rate r dt times pi.
So it's proportional to the value
of the portfolio times the risk-free rate times dt.
Well, let's see what that gives us.
So this is r dt times pi, but after all, pi
is the portfolio value, V minus delta S.
So I have that d pi should be r times v minus delta S dt,
and that's equal to what we had on the previous screen,
which is rV minus our expression for delta.
So that's going to be minus r, this r here.
So I have minus, I have the r in front,
I have delta is this partial of V with respect to S,
times S, dt.
So now if I want to equate the coefficients of dt
on the left-hand side and the right-hand side,
or I should say, on this screen and the previous one,
so here I have one expression for d pi,
and I have this other expression for d pi that just consists
of the first term here.
The second term we've arranged carefully have vanished.
So let's say that this expression for d pi
has to be equal to this expression for d pi,
and let's drop the dt's because all of the coefficients
are the same.
And then we have this expression,
that the partial of V with respect to t plus sigma squared
S squared over 2 d2 V dS squared has to be rV minus rS dV/dS.
So notice the right-hand side is proportional to r.
The left-hand side doesn't have any r's.
Each term has a V or some derivatives of V in it.
So let's put everything over on one side of the equation
and clean things up.
And now we have a partial differential equation
with no randomness left in it.
This equation is the Black-Scholes equation.
Partial of V with respect to t, the time variation
in the derivative, plus rS times partial of V with respect to S,
plus sigma squared S squared over 2 d2 V dS squared minus rV
is all equal to 0.
Notice that we have our two terms here and here
that are proportional to r.
And everything contains V, so this
is a homogeneous equation, linear in V,
of first and second partial derivatives,
plus a term with no derivatives here, this term here.
So we're going to talk about solving the equation,
but what can we say about the equation before we solve it?
Well, we know it's linear in V. Therefore,
we know it obeys superposition.
That is, if we were to have two or more solutions,
we could add them together and get another solution.
So any linear combination of solutions is also a solution.
For equations of this from, we know
that we find the exact unique solution to our problem
from the boundary conditions.
So we'll need to find some general solutions
to this equation.
But then to get the exact ones of interest to us for finance,
we'll need to apply boundary conditions.
What are the parameters in the model?
Well, there's some explicit parameters.
We have r and we have sigma.
Sigma is the volatility and r is the risk-free rate.
But wait a minute.
We started with three parameters, didn't we?
We introduced r at the end because we had a risk-free rate
because we'd eliminated risk by canceling out
the stochastic term.
We have the volatility that we would expect
because of the randomness.
Notice the special cases gets rather trivial
if we set sigma equal to 0.
But we had a third parameter mu.
Where did that go?

And there are some parameters here
that are implicit that come from the boundary conditions.
So if we're thinking about an option,
we need to give an expiration date,
we need to give a strike price, we
need to say whether it's a call or a put,
and all of those things are not part of the equation.
They're not part of the general solutions.
They will be part of the boundary conditions
and determine the specific solution that we have.
