PROFESSOR: There is a publicly traded firm, ABC.
It has 12 million shares outstanding,
and its shares are traded at $25 apiece.
We will assume that this company as of now
is all equity financed and has no debt on its balance sheet.
This company is considering a share repurchase program.
It plans to borrow, take a loan from a bank of $100 million,
and use these funds to repurchase
some of these existing shares.
We will assume that the tax rate is 21%,
and we'll try to understand how this transaction, how
the share repurchase, affects the current shareholders
of this firm.
The first question asks us, what is the current market
value of this firm?
Well, since this firm has no debt on its balance sheet,
so it's all equity financed, the market value of the firm
will equal to the value of equity of this firm, which
can simply be computed as share price, $25 a share,
multiplied by the total number of shares outstanding,
which is 12 million.
So this gives us $300 million.
So therefore, the market value of the firm and the market
value of equity would both equal to $300 million
prior to the announcement of the share repurchase program.
The second question asks, what is
the value of this firm after the loan is taken
but before the shares are purchased?
Well, let's construct the market value balance
sheet of this firm after this transaction.
So first of all, put the assets that we just
received in the form of cash from this loan.
So that's $100 million.
That's the first asset.
The second asset is the original assets that this firm had.
And so the market value of the assets of this firm
is $300 million that we found in part A.
So that's the second part - I call it
the original assets here.
And then the third part is this new asset,
which is the present value of the tax shields
that are generated by this loan, or more
specifically, by the interest payments on this loan.
Remember that the interest is a tax-deductible expense.
We do not pay taxes on that.
And therefore, this loan would generate this valuable tax
shield, and this is the present value of these tax shields.
How did we find this?
Remember that this is just the value
of this loan, $100 million, multiplied
by the tax rate of 21%.
And so this is $21 million.
Now, this calculation makes one important assumption.
It assumes that this loan, it's either
rolled over under the same conditions every year
into perpetuity, or it is just a directly perpetual loan
on which we're paying interest but we're never
repaying the interest.
So therefore, the present value of these tax shields
can be computed by just multiplying
the market value of this loan times the tax rate.
Now, therefore, we have these three assets on our market
value balance sheet.
So cash plus original assets plus the present value
of tax shields.
And this gives us $421 million.
So the answer is that the market value
of this firm after this loan is taken is $421 million.
Now, what is the market value of equity
of this firm after this loan is taken
but before shares are repurchased?
Well, let's continue with the market value balance sheet.
So we've figured out what happened on the asset
side of this balance sheet.
What happens on the liabilities side of this balance sheet?
Well, now we have debt with the market value of $100 million
that we have just taken.
And the remaining part is equity.
And equity here would be applied, because we know
the market value of assets.
And therefore, we know the market value of debt.
And we can compute the market value of equity
as the difference between the market value of assets
and the market value of debt.
Again, this is just because the value
of assets and the value of liabilities
has to add up on the market value balance sheet.
So therefore, this is quite simply $321 million.
So the answer is that the market value
of equity of this term right now, again,
after this loan has been taken but before shares are
repurchased, is $321 million.
Now, what happens to the value of the firm
and the value of its equity after the shares
have been repurchased?
Let's start with the market value balance
sheet that we derived in the previous part of this question
after we've taken the loan but before we've actually
repurchased shares.
Now, when we purchase shares, what happens?
So first is that we are using this cash that we just
raised from this loan to repurchase shares.
So the cash becomes 0 right here.
The market value of assets does not
change as the result of the repurchase.
So it's $300 million here.
And the present value of the tax shield does not change as well.
So that remains at 21.
So therefore, the market value of assets of this firm
has to equal $321 million simply because we took this
$100 million, and we used this to repurchase shares back.
Now, what happens on the liability side of this balance
sheet?
Well, the market value of debt clearly does not change,
so it still stays at $100 million.
This is how much we borrowed.
And equity here is a plug.
So we can find it by taking the total value of the firm, which
right now is $321 million, subtracting debt,
and that gives us $221 million.
Again, because the market value of liabilities and the market
value of assets have to match, so therefore,
both sides of this balance sheet equal to $321 million.
So the answer here is that the market value of the firm
is $321, and the market value of equity is $221 million.
Now, what is the share price of this stock
after the recapitalization has been announced
after we received the loan, but before we've actually
repurchased shares?
Well, we found that in this case,
the market value of equity would be $321 million.
So therefore, we can compare the share price
as the total market value of equity
divided by the number of shares that we have outstanding.
So I abbreviated here this as SHO, Shares Outstanding.
And this will give us share price.
So it's $321 million divided by 12 million shares outstanding.
This gives us $26.75.
So after this has happened, the share price
increases from $25 to $26.75.
Now, how many shares we'll be able to repurchase
in this case?
Well, let's compute it.
Recall that we have-- we just borrowed $100 million,
and we intend to spend the entire $100 million in cash
right now to repurchase as many shares as we can.
Well, how many?
We just found that the share price, the current share price,
is $26.75.
So therefore, if we spend $100 million on this repurchase,
we'll be able to repurchase $100 million
divided by the share price.
This will give us 3.74 million shares.
So this is how many shares we'll be able to repurchase
by spending this cash.
Now, we had 12 million shares in the beginning.
We purchased this many shares.
We have $8.26 million shares remaining.
So now, we can just double check, compute,
what is the new, after this repurchase has been done,
what is the new total market value of equity of this firm?
To do that, all we need to do is to multiply the current share
price, $26.75, by the remaining number
of shares that we have outstanding,
which is 8.26 million.
And this will give us $221 million.
This will be the new value of market, market value of equity
of this firm.
And I know that this has to be $221 million
because we've found this before.
So this is just a double check so you
can take the share price multiplied
by the number of remaining shares,
and you will see that the market value of equity
is $221 million.
Again, it happens just because it was $321 million,
and we repurchased 100 million shares,
so this reduces our total value of equity by $100 million
and reduces the number of total shares
outstanding by $374 million, bringing it
from $12 to $8.26 million.
Finally, let us examine what happens right
after the announcement of this share repurchase program.
So what will happen is that the moment we
announce this repurchase program and before we even
get this loan of $100 million, the market
will understand the tax implications
of this recapitalization.
And the fact that we will generate or this loan
will generate valuable tax shields.
So therefore, in addition to the original assets,
the market will assess the new present value
of the tax shields that this loan will generate.
And we've already computed this before,
so we know it's going to be $21 million.
So therefore, the market will understand
that the total value of assets of this firm
and the total value of this firm will be $300 plus $21--
$321 million.
And the market value of equity will
have to match this new value of the firm.
So the moment the share repurchase program
is announced, the market value of equity of this firm
will go from $300 million to $321 million.
Per share, this will be $26.75.
And this is something that we computed before as well.
The share price is going to go from $25 to $26.75.
If you put this on the chart in terms of sort of timeline
when this happens--
so this is $25.
The moments we announced the repurchase, the share price
in an efficient market will jump from $25 to $26.75,
and at that point onwards, it will stay at $26.75
because we already computed.
So the moment we got the loan is going
to be the same share price.
We will repurchase at this exact share price,
and the repurchase itself will not
have any effect on the value of the firm.
So the pricing effect will happen at the point in time
when this program is announced.
And then it will stay constant throughout
the subsequent events, such as getting the loan
and using the cash that we will receive from the loan
to actually repurchase shares.
