
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will illustrate
based on a simple example that valuation approaches based
on adjusted present value, and based
on weighted average cost of capital yield the same results.
Consider a firm that is expected to generate $100 million
in earnings before interest and taxes in year one.
These earnings are expected to grow
at a 2% rate in perpetuity.
Suppose that assets of this firm have a market beta of 1.35.
The firm has a $500 million loan which
carries an interest rate of 5%.
Each year the firm is planning to increase loan amount
proportionally with its earnings to maintain a constant debt
to equity ratio in perpetuity.
Assume that the cost of debt will remain at 5%,
assume that the risk free rate is 3%,
and the expected return on the market portfolio is 10%.
Corporate income tax rate is 25%.
We will answer the following questions:
what would be the value of this firm
if it was 100% equity financed?
What is the present value of interest tax shields?
What is the value of this firm?
What is the weighted average cost of capital for this firm?
Find the value of this firm using the WACC
and compare it to part (c).

Let's start with the first question.
The unlevered firm value is the after tax earnings divided
by the asset cost of capital, minus growth rate, g.
The tax rate is 25%, earnings next year are 100 million
and the perpetual growth rate is 2%.
The only unknown is the asset cost of capital.
We're given asset beta, and hence, we
can apply the capital asset pricing
model to find the asset cost of capital.
Given the beta, the risk free rate, and the expected return
in the market portfolio, we find that the asset cost of capital
is 12.45%.
This gives us the unlevered firm value of $717.70 million.
Next, let's find the present value of interest tax shields.
Since the firm value grows at a 2% rate,
the debt value has to grow at a 2% rate
as well in order for the firm to maintain constant leverage
ratio.
Interest tax shield in year one equals
to the tax rate, which is 25%, times the interest expense,
which is 5% times $500 million.
This gives us $6.25 million.
Since the firm maintains constant leverage ratio,
the risk of interest tax shields is the same
as the risk of firm's assets.
Therefore, to find their present value,
we're discounting them at the asset cost of capital.
Since tax shields grow at a 2% rate in perpetuity,
their present value can be found by applying growing perpetuity
formula.
We find that the present value of tax shields
equals to $59.81 million.
To find the value of the firm, we
are adding the present value of interest tax shields
to the unlevered firm value.
We see that the firm value equals to $777.51 million.
Next, let's find the weighted average cost of capital.
By definition, the WACC equals to the cost of equity capital,
multiplied by the equity to value ratio,
plus the after tax cost of debt capital multiplied by debt
to value ratio.
We know all of the ingredients in this equation
except for the cost of equity, therefore, let's find it first.
To find the equity cost of capital,
we will use Modigliani-Miller proposition II.
Recall the equity cost of capital
equals to the asset cost of capital,
plus debt to equity ratio, multiplied
by the difference in the asset and debt cost of capital.
To find debt to equity ratio, recall
that debt value is $500 million, and the value
of the levered firm is $777.51 million,
which implies that the value of equity is $277.51 million.
Putting everything together, we find that the cost of equity
is 25.87%.
Notice that due to very high leverage equity
is more than twice as risky as assets of the firm.
Knowing the cost of equity, we can
find the weighted average cost of capital.
We see that it equals to 11.65%.
Recall that the asset cost of capital equals to 12.45%.
The WACC is lower than the asset cost of capital
due to the tax benefits of debt.
Finally, we can compute the firm value using the WACC
that we just computed.
Levered firm value equals to the after tax earnings,
divided by the weighted average cost of capital,
minus growth rate, g.
The tax rate is 25%, earnings next year are $100 million,
and the perpetual growth rate is 2%.
Given the WACC of 11.65%, we find
that the levered firm value equals to the $777.51 million.
This is exactly the same value that we
found by applying the adjusted present value
method in the beginning of this question.