PROFESSOR: In this video, we will demonstrate
how to value a leveraged firm by using the adjusted
present value approach in a situation
when the firm maintains a constant leverage ratio.
Consider a firm that generates $10 million
in earnings before interest and taxes each year in perpetuity.
The required return on assets of this firm is 10%.
Suppose that the firm's financing policy is such
that it constantly maintains debt at 25% of its asset value.
At this level, the debt is risk free.
Assume that the corporate income tax rate is 25%
and that the risk-free rate is 2%.
What is the value of this firm?
To find the value of this firm, we
will apply the adjusted present value method.
The levered firm value equals to the unleveraged firm
value plus the present value of interest tax shields.
Since the firm generates perpetual earnings
of $10 million, the value of the unlevered firm
is the present value of perpetuity
with after-tax earnings generated
every year discounted to present at the asset cost of capital.
Given the tax rate of 25% and the asset cost
of capital of 10%, we find that the unlevered firm
value is $75 million.
Since the firm constantly adjusts debt amount
so that leverage ratio stays constant,
future debt amount and hence tax shield
is as uncertain as cash flows of the firm.
This means that to find the present value of tax shields,
we discount them at the asset cost of capital.
Since the firm keeps debt at 25% of its asset value
and the current asset value is $75 million,
it implies that the current value of debt
must be $18.75 million.
Note that the value of assets and the value
of the unlevered firm are the same.
Recall that the debt is risk free.
Hence the interest on debt is rf times D,
and the tax shield is tax rate times rf times D. These tax
shields will continue into perpetuity,
and hence their present value is the value
of annual tax shield divided by the asset cost of capital.
Recall that the asset cost of capital
is the appropriate discount rate for these tax shields given
that the firm maintains constant leverage ratio.
Plugging in the numbers, we get 25% times 2%
times $18.75 million divided by 10%.
This gives us the present value of tax shields
of $0.94 million.
Adding the value of the unlevered firm
and the value of interest tax shields,
we find that the value of this firm equals to $75.94 million.
Note that the interest tax shields account only
for 1.2% of this firm's total value.
This is because the leverage ratio is fairly low,
the interest rate on this debt is low,
and the risk of these tax shields is high.
The combination of these factors results in low present value
of tax shields.
