
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will demonstrate
how to value a leveraged firm by using its weighted average cost
of capital.
You're a consultant who was hired
to evaluate the new product line for Kendall Enterprises.
The upfront investment required to launch the product line
is $10 million.
The product will generate free cash flow of $750,000
the first year, and this free cash flow
is expected to grow at a rate of 4% per year.
Kendall has an equity cost of capital of 11.3%,
a debt cost of capital of 5%, and a tax rate of 35%.
Kendall maintains a debt to equity ratio of 0.4.
What is the NPV of the new product line, including
any tax shields from leverage?
How much debt will Kendall initially take on
as a result of launching this product line?
How much of the product line's value
is attributable to the present value of interest tax shields?
Let's start with the first question.
NPV of the new product line is the present value of cash flows
it will generate minus the investment cost.
We know that the investment cost is $100 million.
Therefore, in order to find the NPV,
we need to find the present value of cash flows.
The cash flows that the new product
line generates are expected to grow
at a 4% rate in perpetuity.
Therefore, we can find the present value of these cash
flows by using the present value of growing perpetuity formula.
Recall that next year's cash flow from the New line
equals $750,000.
Importantly, note that we're discounting these cash
flows at WACC.
Using WACC as a discount rate allows us to directly
incorporate the value of interest tax shields
into the value of the project.
Let's find WACC.
By definition, WACC equals to the cost
of equity capital multiplied by equity to value ratio
plus aftertax cost of debt capital
multiplied by debt to value ratio.
In our case, cost of equity is 11.3%, cost of debt is 5%,
and the tax rate is 35%.
Since the firm maintains constant debt
to equity ratio of 0.4, this means
that equity to value ratio equals to 1 over 1.4
and debt to value ratio equals to 0.4 over 1.4.
We see that the weighted average cost of capital for this firm
equals 9%.
Knowing WACC, we can compute the present value of cash flows
from the new product line.
It equals to $750,000 divided by 9% minus 4%, which
equals to $15 million.
Knowing the present value of cash flows
from the new product line, we can find its NPV.
We see that the net present value of this product line
is $5 million.
Next, let's find out how much debt Kendall will initially
need to take on as a result of launching this new product
line.
The new line adds $15 million in assets
to the left-hand side of the market value balance sheet.
Recall that Kendall maintains debt-to-equity ratio
of 0.4, which means that debt accounts
for 28.57% of its value.
In order to maintain the debt-to-value ratio at 28.57%,
Kendall needs to take new debt in the amount
of 28.57% times $50 million, which equals to $4.29 million.
The remaining $10.71 million needs
to be financed with equity.
Finally, let's find how much of the product line's value
is attributable to the present value of interest tax shields.
In order to answer this question, we need to find
what would the present value of cash flows from the project
have been if it was 100% equity financed?
In order to do that, we need to discount the cash flows
at the asset cost of capital.
Let's find out what it is.
The asset cost of capital, also known
as the unlevered cost of capital,
equals to the equity cost of capital times equity
to value ratio plus debt cost of capital times debt
to value ratio.
Plugging in the numbers, we find that the asset cost of capital
in our case equals to 9.5%.
Knowing the asset cost of capital,
we can compute the present value of cash flows
from this new line if it was 100% equity financed.
It equals to $13.64 million.
The value of the new line attributable
to the present value of tax shields equals to $15 million
minus $13.64 million, which gives us $1.36 million.
There is also an alternative way of finding the present value
of interest tax shields.
Since the initial value of debt is $4.29 million,
the tax shield in the first year is $4.29 million times 5%,
which is the cost of debt, times 35%, which is the tax rate.
This gives us $0.075 million.
Since the firm maintains constant leverage ratio,
the risk of tax shields is the same as the risk of cash flows.
Therefore, we're discounting them
at the asset cost of capital.
Also, since debt to value ratio is fixed
and since the value of the firm grows at 4% in perpetuity,
the value of tax shields also grows at 4% in perpetuity.
Applying the growing perpetuity formula,
we find that the present value of tax shields
equals to $1.36 million.
