
PROFESSOR: Suppose a firm wants to invest in the project.
For example, recently Apple started its TV+ service,
which competes with Netflix, HBO,
and other media services providers and production
companies.
To evaluate this decision, Apple needs to project future cash
flows TV+ will generate and discount them to present.
Now, what discount rate should be
used to evaluate this investment decision?
The answer to this question is that Apple
should use expected return offered
in the market on an investment of comparable risk.
To understand why, suppose Apple seeks to raise capital from
outside investors to finance its investment in TV+.
In order to attract funds, the firm
must offer an expected return comparable to what
investors could earn elsewhere with the same risk and horizon.

But what if Apple can fund this project internally?
As of March 2020, Apple has more than $40 billion in cash
on its balance sheet, clearly enough to fund any project.
What discount rate should Apple use in order to determine
whether they should invest in TV+ if they can fund this
project internally.
The answer is the same rate as they
would use if they financed the project with outside investors
money.
This is because any funds invested in the new project
could be returned to shareholders
to invest elsewhere.
The new project should be taken only if it offers a better
return than shareholders other investment opportunities.
We call the discount rate, the opportunity cost of capital
or simply the cost of capital for the project.
The opportunity cost of capital is the best available
expected return offered in the market
on an investment of comparable risk and term
to the cash flows being discounted.
The opportunity cost of capital provides the benchmark
against which the cash flows of the new investments
should be evaluated.
For a risk-free project, it will typically
correspond to the interest rate on US treasury securities
with similar term.
The cost of capital for risky projects
will often exceed this amount, depending on the nature
and magnitude of the risk.
We will develop tools for estimating
the cost of capital for risky projects later in the course.

An important implication of this insight
is that the cost of capital for a specific project
may differ from the cost of capital for the entire firm.
In our example, can we use Apple's cost of capital
for the entire firm as the cost of capital for the TV+ project.
The answer is no.
Apple's primary source of revenue
is iPhone, which is a different product from the media
production and distribution business.
In order to evaluate TV+ service,
we need to use cost of capital of firms engaged in media
business, such as Netflix.