
PROFESSOR: To carry on business, a corporation
needs real assets.
For example, in order to produce cars,
Tesla Motors needs a factory to assemble them.
In corporate finance, a decision to build a factory
is what we refer to as an investment decision.
Investment decisions are the most important decisions made
by the management of any firm.
A firm's management must weigh the costs and benefits
of all investments and projects and decide which of them
qualify as good uses of the money stockholders
have invested in the firm.
These investment decisions fundamentally
shape what the firm does and whether it
will add value for its owners.
In this course, we will develop the tools
necessary to make good investment decisions.
Investment decisions are often referred to
as capital budgeting decisions.
Once management has decided which investments to make,
they also decide how to pay for them.
Large investments may require the corporation
to raise additional money.
Management must decide whether to raise more money
from new and existing owners by selling more shares of stock
or to borrow the money.
In this course, we will discuss the characteristics
of each source of funds and how to decide
which one to use in the context of the corporation's
overall mix of debt and equity.
We call such decisions financing decisions.
Let's consider an example.
In summer 2018, Tesla Motors started developing and building
a factory in Shanghai called Tesla Giga Shanghai.
Their facility's currently producing final assemblies
of the Tesla Model 3 and will produce
Tesla Model Y, with delivery slated
to begin in January 2021.
This is an example of investment decision.
Now, in May 2019, Tesla issued and sold around
2,750,000 shares.
In addition, around the same time,
Tesla issued convertible notes, which
is a type of instrument that has characteristics of both equity
and debt, with the total value of around $1.35 billion.
Both the issuance of shares and the issuance
of convertible notes are examples of financing decisions
by Tesla.
In addition to investment and financing decisions,
management must ensure that the firm
has enough cash on hand to meet its day-to-day obligations.
This job, commonly known as working capital management,
may seem straightforward, but in a young and growing company,
it can mean the difference between success and failure.
Even companies with great products
require significant amounts of money
to develop and bring those products to market.
For example, developing Airbus 380 cost billions of euros
and took seven years.
A company typically burns through a significant amount
of cash developing a new product before its sales generate
income.
It is the job of Chief Financial Officer, or the CFO,
to make sure that access to cash does not
hinder the firm's success.
When a firm generates sufficient cash flow,
it must decide how to use that cash.
If the firm has new investment opportunities,
it can reinvest the cash and increase the value of the firm.
Many young, rapidly growing firms
reinvest 100% of their cash flows in this way.
But mature, profitable firms often
find that they generate more cash
than they need to fund all of their attractive investment
opportunities.
An example of such firms would be Apple and Microsoft
right now.
When the firm has excess cash, it
can hold those funds as part of its cash reserves
or pay the cash out to shareholders.
If the firm decides to follow the latter approach,
it has two choices.
First, it can pay a dividend, or second, it
can repurchase shares from the current owners.
These decisions represent the firm's payout policy.
In this course, we will discuss what determines a firm's payout
policy.
Another important corporate financial decision
is risk management.
All firms are subject to risk from a variety of sources,
changes in consumer tastes and demand for their products,
fluctuations in the cost of raw materials,
employee turnover, the entry of new competitors,
and countless other uncertainties.
Entrepreneurs and corporate managers willingly
take on these risks in the pursuit of high returns
and accept them as part of the costs of doing business,
but as with any other cost, firms
must manage risk to minimize the effect
on the value of the firm.
The primary method of risk management is prevention.
For example, firms can avoid or at least
reduce any potential risks by making prudent investment
decisions and by conducting appropriate due diligence when
entering into new relationships.
But some risks are too costly to prevent
and are inevitable consequences of running a business.
The firm shares these business risks
with its investors, who buy securities issued by the firm.
For example, some of the risk is passed onto debt holders, who
bear the risk that the firm will default, but most of the risk
is typically passed to equity holders, who
are exposed to the volatility of the stock's return.
Both types of investors can reduce their risk
by holding the firm securities in
a well-diversified portfolio.
In this course, we will consider the strategies
that firms use to manage and reduce the risk borne
by the investors.
We will learn how firms can use financial markets to offload
the risk associated with changes in commodity prices
and interest rate movements.