
PROFESSOR: In theory, the goal of a firm
should be determined by the firm's owners.
A sole proprietorship has a single owner who runs the firm.
So the goals of a sole proprietorship
are the same as the owner's goals.
But in organizational forms with multiple owners,
the appropriate goal of the firm is not as clear.
Many corporations have thousands of owners.
Each owner is likely to have different interests
and priorities.
Whose interests and priorities determine
the goals of the firm?
You might be surprised to learn that the interests
of shareholders are aligned for many, if not most,
important decisions.
That is because, regardless of their own personal financial
position and stage in life, all the shareholders
will agree that they are better off if management
makes decisions that increase the value of their shares.
For example, between January 2013 and June 2018,
the stock price of Netflix has increased almost 30 times.
Clearly, regardless of their preferences
and other differences, all investors
who held shares of Netflix stock over this period
have benefited from the investment decisions
that managers of Netflix have made.
But even when all the owners of a corporation
agree on the goals of the corporation,
these goals must be implemented.
And in simple organizational form,
like a sole proprietorship, the owner who runs the firm
can ensure that the firm's goals matched his or her own.
But a corporation is run by a management team
separate from its owners, giving rise to conflicts of interest.
How can the owner of a corporation
ensure that the management team will implement their goals?
Because of the separation of ownership and control
in a corporation, managers have little incentive
to work in the interest of the shareholders
when this means working against their own self-interest.
This is called an agency problem when managers,
despite being hired as agents of shareholders,
put their own self-interest ahead of the interests
of shareholders.
This agency problem is commonly addressed, in practice,
by minimizing the number of decisions managers
must make for which their own self-interest substantially
differs from the interests of the shareholders.
For example, managers' compensation contracts
are designed to ensure that most decisions in the shareholders'
interests are also in the manager's interests.
Shareholders often tie the compensation of top managers
to the corporation's profits and to its stock price.
There is, however, a limitation to the strategy.
By tying compensation too closely to performance,
the shareholders might be asking managers to take on more risk
than they are comfortable taking.
As a result, managers may make decisions
that are too conservative.
On the other hand, if compensation contracts
reduce managers risk by rewarding good performance
but limiting the penalty associated
with poor performance, managers may have an incentive
to take excessive risk.
Another way shareholders can encourage managers to work
in the interests of shareholders is to discipline them if they
don't.
If shareholders are unhappy with the CEO's performance,
they could, in principle, pressure the board
to oust the CEO.
In 2019, for example, CEOs of Warner Brothers,
Under Armor, Nike, and Boeing were all reportedly
forced to resign by their boards.
Despite this high profile as examples,
directors and top executives are rarely
replaced through a grassroots shareholders uprising.
Instead, dissatisfied investors often
choose to sell their shares.

When the stock performs poorly, the board of directors
might react by replacing the CEO.
In some corporations, however, the senior executives
are entrenched because boards of directors
do not have the will to replace them.
Often the reluctance to fire happens
because the board members are close friends of the CEO
and lack objectivity.
In corporations in which the CEO is entrenched and doing
a poor job, the expectation of continued poor performance
will decrease the stock price.

But low stock prices create a profit opportunity.
In a hostile takeover, an individual or organization,
sometimes known as a corporate raider,
can purchase a large fraction of the stock
and acquire enough votes to replace the board of directors
and the CEO.
With a new superior management team,
the stock is a much more attractive investment,
which will likely result in the price rise and a profit
for the corporate raider and the other shareholders.
Although the words "hostile" and "raider"
have negative connotations, corporate "raiders"
themselves provide an important service to shareholders.
The mere threat of being removed as a result
of a hostile takeover is often enough to discipline
bad managers and motivate boards of directors
to make difficult decisions.
Consequently, when a corporation's shares
are publicly traded, a market for corporate control
is created that encourages managers and boards
of directors to act in the interests
of their shareholders.
Further potential for conflicts of interest
and ethical considerations arise when
some stakeholders in the corporation benefit and others
lose from a decision.
Shareholders and managers are two stakeholders
in the corporation.
But others include the regular employees
and the communities in which the company operates, for example.
Managers may decide to take the interest of other stakeholders
into account in their decisions, such as keeping a loss
generating factory open because it is the main provider of jobs
in a small town, paying above market wages
to factory workers in a developing country,
or operating a plant at a higher environmental standard
than local law mandates.
In some cases, these actions that benefit other stakeholders
also benefit the firm's shareholders
by creating a more dedicated workforce, generating
positive publicity with customers,
and other indirect effects.
In other instances, when these decisions
benefit other stakeholders at shareholders' expense,
they represent a form of corporate charity.
Indeed, many, if not most, corporations explicitly
donate on behalf of their shareholders
to local and global charitable and political causes.
For example, biotechnology firm Gilead Sciences
donated $388 million in 2017 to charitable causes,
making it the largest contributor in 2017.
These actions are costly and they reduce shareholder wealth.
Thus, while some shareholders might support such policies
because they feel that they reflect
their own moral and ethical priorities,
it is unlikely that all shareholders
will feel this way, leading to potential conflicts
of interest among shareholders.
Now, what about society at large?
Are decisions that increase the value of the firm's equity
beneficial for society as a whole?
Most often they are.
While shareholders of Netflix have become much richer,
its customers also are better off
with the quality and availability of streaming
content that they might otherwise never have had,
which might be especially valuable during the crisis
times, such as COVID-19.
But even if the corporation only makes its shareholders
better off, as long as nobody else
is made worse off by its decisions,
increasing the value of equity is good for society.
The problem occurs when increasing the value of equity
comes at the expense of others.
Consider a corporation that, in the course of its business,
pollutes the environment and does not pay the cost
to clean up the pollution.
Alternatively, a corporation may not itself
pollute but use of its products may harm the environment.
In such cases, decisions that increase shareholder wealth
can be costly for society as a whole.
In economics, we refer to such cases
as negative externalities.
When the actions of the corporation
impose harm on others in the economy,
appropriate public policy and regulation
is required to assure that corporate interests
and societal interests remain aligned.

Sound public policies should allow
firms to continue to pursue their maximization
of shareholder value in a way that benefits society overall.