
PROFESSOR: In this video, I would
like to introduce you to an important tool frequently used
in corporate finance to analyze corporate financial
transactions.
It's called market-value balance sheet.
Market-value balance sheet is similar to a "regular," quote,
unquote, balance sheet that I put here
for comparison on the right-hand side with the difference
that both assets and liabilities side
of the market-value balance sheet
are quoted in market values, not book values.
We traditionally distinguish two important parts
of the liability side of the balance sheet, namely debt
and equity.
And we quote both of them in market values
which, here, I denote as MV.
And equity would also be quoted in market values, not
book values.
On the left-hand side of the balance sheet,
we have our assets which, again, consist
of cash and long-term assets, which would also
be measured and quoted in the market values and not book
values.
For comparison, we can see that, in the regular balance
sheet on the right, that equity and assets
are quoted in their book values and not their market values.
Different corporate financial transactions
may have different impact on the market-value balance sheet
and on the regular balance sheet.
And here, we will consider several examples.
Suppose a firm uses cash to build a factory.
For example, Tesla uses its available cash
to build a new production facility.
What impact does this transaction
have on both regular balance sheet
and on the market-value balance sheet?
Let's start with the regular balance sheet.
Let me schematically draw it.
In here, I'm going to separate the assets
into cash and other assets, which I will call LTA, which
stands for Long-Term Asset.
In this particular transaction, the firm
uses part of its cash to build additional long-term assets.
In this case, it's a factory.
So therefore, it just turns one part of its assets
into another one.
And therefore, this transaction has
no impact on the right-hand side of this balance sheet.
So in other words, neither the book value of that
nor the book value of equity are affected as a result
of this transaction.
Now, things are slightly more interesting
for the market-value balance sheet.
Let me also schematically draw it, and also
separate assets into cash, and into long-term assets.
Let's assume for a moment that this transaction is a zero NPV
transaction.
So then, in this case, the company again just uses cash
to build a factory.
And it doesn't create additional value on its balance sheet.
However, if this transaction has positive net-present value,
then as a result of this transaction,
the total value of long-term assets
is going to increase more than the decrease in the cash
that we use to build this factory.
So therefore, we're creating this additional value
as a result of this transaction, which again reflects
the fact that the net-present value of this transaction
is positive.
Now, in this case, the right-hand side of this balance
sheet has to increase.
And this increase has to be proportional with this NPV
so that the left-hand side of the balance sheet
equals to the right-hand side of this balance sheet.
Now, this additional value can accrue
to either existing equity holders or existing debt
holders.
So this is debt, and this is equity.
This depends on the extent to which the original debt was
safe or risky, so something that we
will talk more about in the second part of this course.
If we for a moment assume that this positive NPV accrues only
to the equity holders, then as a result of this transaction,
the market value of equity is going to go up
by the amount of this NPV.
And so this new part would be the new value of equity.
And we will see this in an increase in the share price.
So when the firm announces that it has plans
and it uses its existing cash to build a new factory,
the stock price and the market value of equity
is going to increase by the amount
of this net present value that this transaction creates.

Let's consider a second example.
Suppose that a CEO of a firm dies in a plane crash.
What impact does this tragic event have on the regular
and on the market-value balance sheets of this firm?
Let's start with the regular balance sheet.
Let me schematically draw it here again.
So we have assets on the left.
We have debt and equity on the right.
Now, it is very clear that this transaction has
no impact on neither the book value of assets,
because they stay intact, nor on the book value of debt
or the equity of this firm.
So in other words, this event has
no impact on the regular balance sheet at all.
When it comes to the market-value balance sheet,
things are more interesting.
Suppose for a moment that the old CEO was a great CEO,
and the new CEO is not as good.
In this case then, the market value of assets will decline.
And let us assume that it is declining
by this much to reflect this value loss.
This value loss is going to come from the fact
that the plans that the original CEO had for the firm
will not materialize.
And this firm will not be as prosperous
as it would have been if it was run by the original CEO.
So the market value of assets of this firm
is going to be this smaller part on this chart.
Now, this value loss, of course, has
to be reflected on the right as well.
And so the right-hand side of the balance sheet
is going to shrink by exactly this much.
And this value loss can accrue to both equity holders and debt
holders of this firm.
Again, it depends on how risky the original debt was--
something that we'll cover in the second part of this course.
But it is almost universally the case
that the value of equity of this firm
is going to decline as a result of this event.
And so therefore, we're going to see
that the stock price reaction is going to be negative.
And the market value of equity of this firm
is going to decline.
Let's consider a third and final example.
Suppose a firm issues debt to pay a dividend.
What impact does this transaction
have on the regular and on the market-value balance sheets?
First, let's start with the regular balance sheet.
This transaction increases the book value of debt
by this much.
So suppose that this is how much we're
taking on to pay the dividend.
And it decreases the book value of equity
by the corresponding amount, because this
is how much dividend we pay to our existing equity holders.
So therefore, this is the additional amount of new debt.
And this is by how much the new debt grows.
And this is by how much equity shrinks.
And so this is the new value of equity of this firm.
Notice that this transaction has no impact on the left-hand side
of this balance sheet, so the book value of assets
stays intact.

Now let's see how this transaction impacts
the market-value balance sheet.
So first, the market value of debt
will increase to reflect the market value of this new debt
that we're issuing to pay a dividend.
And this would be the new total market value of debt
that this firm will have.
The market value of equity will decline proportionally
with the amount of dividend that we pay to our shareholders.
And so therefore, together, these transactions
or these impacts are similar to what
we've seen happening on the regular balance
sheet in book-value terms.
However, these may not be the only effects
that are happening.
Suppose that investors positively
interpret this information.
And as a result, the market value of equity
increases by this much.
This increase in the value of equity
has to be reflected on the left-hand side
of this market-value balance sheet as well.
And therefore, the market value of assets
has to increase by this much as well.
So therefore, this transaction has this additional impact
on the market-value balance sheet.
So altogether, the market value of debt increases.
The market value of equity decreases, but not
as much as it would have been if there was not
this additional informational impact.
And the left-hand side, or the market-value
of assets of this firm, increases as a result
of this transaction.
Overall, in finance, we're interested in understanding
how various transactions affect the market value of debt,
the market value of equity, and the market
value of assets of the firm.
Therefore, we primarily focus our attention
on the market-value balance sheet,
as opposed to the regular balance sheet.
And therefore, it has an important role
as a tool in finance.