
PROFESSOR: Suppose that you have an outstanding loan that
requires ten annual payments of $2,300.
Now is Year Zero, and the next payment on the loan
is due in Year 6.
The last payment is due in Year 15.
There is a bank account that offers 5% annual interest rate.
You would like to make a deposit into this account today, which
would allow you to repay this loan.
What is the amount that you need to deposit?
This question is similar to question 1
because we have the same annual payment, the same interest
rate.
The only difference is that our payments start in Year 6
and end in Year 15.
So let's first find the present value of these payments
by using brute-force.
So I'll start discounting each of these individual payments,
similar to what we did in question 1,
by taking the payment and dividing it
by 1 plus the discount rate.
And I will raise it to the power,
which equals to the year in which this payment occurs.

We'll extend this array.
This would give me the present value of each
of these individual payments.
And I will add them up.
And this will give me the present value
of all of these payments, which would equal to $13,915.42.
Now, let's do something smarter.
First, I will relabel the timeline
but ignoring the first year in which we receive payment
by Year 1.
In this case, Year 6 in the actual timeline,
is Year 1 in the new timeline.
In this new timeline, the stream of payments
looks like a regular annuity, and we
can find its present value.
In fact, we already found it in question 1.
It equals to $17,760.
But in the old timeline, this is the value
in Year 5, not present value.
To find its present value, what we need to do,
we need to discount it by dividing it
by 1 plus our interest rate, 5%, raised to the power of 5.
By doing so, we get $13,915.42.
This is exactly the same answer as we
obtained by discounting each payment manually.
The stream of cash flows we started in this question
represents a delayed annuity.
Now, let's summarize what we learned in this question.
If we need to find a present value of a delayed annuity that
starts paying in Year N, we need to do the following.
First, we use the annuity formula to find its value
in Year N minus 1.
And second, we discount Year N minus 1 value to present.