
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to work with effective annual rates
and with annual percentage rates.
Let's start with Part A of this question.
A credit card company charges you 20% annual percentage
rate or APR compounded monthly.
What is the Effective Annual Rate or EAR
that you are being charged?

To find the effective annual rate,
we use the formula we developed in the lecture.
EAR equals to 1 plus APR divided by k,
and raised to the power k, minus 1,
where k is the number of compounding intervals
in a year.
In our case APR equals to 20% and k equals to 12
because the credit card company compounds interest monthly
and there are 12 months in a year.
This gives us EAR of 21.94%.
Overall this result indicates that the bank effectively
charges us 21.94% which is substantially higher compared
to the APR of 20%.
Let's continue with Part B of this question.
Suppose that you work for a credit card company
and you would like to earn an effective annual rate of 25%
on your credit card loans.
You are free to choose a compounding interval
with the only constraint that the shortest
period has to be one day.
Assuming that you want to present the lowest
APR to your customers, what is the optimal frequency
of compounding?
What is the APR at the optimal compounding frequency?
As we have seen in the lecture, for a given APR,
the higher the frequency of compounding, the higher
is the effective annual rate.
Our goal in this question is to find the optimal compounding
frequency for a given EAR that would result in the lowest APR.
Intuitively, for a fixed EAR, we should compound interest
as frequently as possible because the higher compounding
frequency will lead to lower APR.
In our case, the optimal frequency of compounding
should be daily.
Let's do the following.
First, we will compute APR assuming daily compounding.
Then we will compute APR assuming quarterly compounding.
And then we will generalize this result.
Let's start with daily compounding.
Assume that there are 365 days in a year.
For a given effective annual rate of 25%, let's find APR.
Let's start with the basic relationship
between EAR and APR.
1 plus effective annual rate equals
to 1 plus APR divided by k which is the compounding frequency
raised to the power of k.
We can rearrange this equation to find APR
as a function of EAR.
APR would equal to k, the compounding frequency
multiplied by 1 plus EAR raised to the power of 1
over k minus 1.
For an effective annual rate of 25%
in daily compounded interest, APR in this case
would be 22.3%.
Now let's compute APR if interest is compounded
quarterly instead of daily.
In this case, compounding frequency k
would equal to 4, which would give us an APR of 22.9%.
Therefore, if we choose quarterly compounding,
the APR of 22.9% would give us effective annual rate of 25%.
But if we choose daily compounding the APR of 22.3%
would still give us the effective annual rate of 25%.
So given that we want to earn effective annual rate of 25%
and we want to display the lowest
APR to our customer as possible, we
should choose daily compounding.
This would allow us to advertise APR of 22.3%.
Let's generalize this result.
Here, I have created an array that
denotes the frequency of compounding from 1 all the way
to 365.
One corresponds to annual compounding and 365
corresponds to daily compounding.
Now for each of these intervals, I will compute APR.
We see that for quarterly compounding
APR equals to 22.9% which matches
the number we found before.
For annual compounding when k equals to 1,
APR is 25% which intuitively should be correct
because when interest is compounded annually
APR should equal to EAR.
Now the plot to the right shows APR
as a function of compounding interval for a given
effective annual rate of 25%.
This is a decreasing function which
indicates that highest compounding frequency
corresponds to lowest APR.
Recall that for daily compounding interest,
APR equals to 22.3%.
Overall, this illustrates that our decision
to go with daily compounding is the right one.