
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to find present value of growing annuity.
Now is Year 0.
A biotechnology company has developed
a new nanorobotic surgical device.
The patent on the device will last 15 years.
You expect that the profit from the device will be $5 million
in Year 1.
From Year 1 until Year 15, annual profit
is expected to grow at a rate of 4% per year.
After patent expires, the emergence of new devices
and competition with other biotech firms
will drive profits from this surgical device to zero.
The question asks us, what is the present value
of the new device if the discount rate is 9% per year?
Let's first use brute-force to find
the present value of profits generated by this device.
As the question states, in Year 1,
this device generates $5 million in profits.
From that point onwards, these profits grow at a 4% rate.
So in a Year 2, the profit generated by this device
will be $5 million multiplied by 1 plus the growth rate of 4%.
And this growth will continue all the way to Year 15.
So in Year 15, the device generates
$8,658,382 in profits.
Now, what I will do in the next column,
I will discount each of these cash flows
individually to present.
So the present value of the first cash flow
will be $5 million divided by 1 plus the discount rate of 9%,
raised to the power 1.
This is the year when this cash flow occurs.
And we'll continue doing so all the way to Year 15.
For example, in Year 15 the present value
of the profit that occurs in Year 15
would be this value divided by 1 plus discount rate of 9%,
raised to the power of 15.
Now what's left is to add them up.
So the sum of these discount values
would represent the total present value
of all profits generated by this nanorobotic device.
Now let's do something smarter.
Notice that the stream of cash flows
that we have in this question represents a growing annuity.
Each payment growth has a growth rate of g equals to 4%.
The discount rate is 9%.
And the number of periods over which will get cash flow
is 15 years.
So therefore, to find the present value
of the stream of cash flows, we can
use growing annuity formula.
So the present value of this growing annuity
would be the first payment, which is $5 million,
divided by discount rate, 9%, minus growth rate,
4%, multiplied by 1 minus 1 plus g,
which is 4%, raised to the power of 15--
this is the total number of periods over which we'll
receive the cash flow--
divided by 1 plus discount rate, 9%,
raised again to the power 15.
So this value, if we compute it, will equal to $50,557,250
exactly the same value that we obtained
by applying the brute-force.
Overall, it is much more efficient to find
the present value of this stream of cash flows
by using the growing annuity formula
instead of discounting each of the individual cash flows
by hand.
And therefore, this should be our preferred approach
going forward.