PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to work with regular and delayed perpetuity.
Suppose that you are chief financial officer
of a company that owns a commercial real estate
property that is currently unused and is unoccupied.
Assuming that the appropriate discount rate is 7%,
you would like to estimate the value of this property
under the following two assumptions.
A, you can start renting it out immediately.
You expect the annual rental profit to be $650,000
and to continue in perpetuity.
The first payment will occur in year one.
B, you will spend the first four years
redeveloping this property.
The present value of redevelopment costs
is $1 million.
Starting in year five, you will receive annual rental profit
of $950,000 which will continue in perpetuity.

What is the value of the property under scenarios A
and B?
Let's start our analysis by looking at scenario A.
If we rent out our property immediately,
we will receive $650,000 in year one.
This profit will continue being generated every year
in perpetuity.
So therefore, this stream of cash flows
represents a regular perpetuity.
The first payment starts in year one and it continues forever.
Therefore, we can find the present value
of this perpetual stream of cash flows
by taking the first payment that we receive of $650,000
and just dividing it by the discount rate, in our case,
it is 7%.
So the present value of this rental profit is $9,285,714.
So therefore, this property will generate exactly that much
throughout its perpetual lifetime.
Now, let's turn to the analysis of scenario
B. In this scenario, we develop the property
during the first four years.
It starts generating a profit of $950,000 in year five,
and this profit will be generated every year thereafter
forever.
We call this stream of cash flows a delayed perpetuity.
It is similar to regular perpetuity
with the only difference that the first cash flow starts not
in year one, but later.
In our case, it starts in year five.
To find the present value of the delayed perpetuity,
let's follow an approach we developed in question two.
Let's draw a timeline, a new timeline,
by denoting the first year in which we receive payment
by year one.
In this case, year five in the actual timeline
is year one in the new timeline.
In this new timeline, the stream of payments
looks like a regular perpetuity.
And we can find its present value.
It equals to $950,000 divided by 7% which is $13,571,429.
Importantly, note that in the actual timeline,
this value is in the year four, not in year zero.
To find its present value, we need to discount it further
by dividing it by one plus 7% raise to the power of four.
Therefore, the present value of this delayed perpetuity
is $10,353,578.
Overall, what we've found so far is that this property
generates $10,353,578.
Taking into account the present value of redevelopment costs,
which are $1 million, the value of the property
under this scenario is $9,353,578.
Recall that if we choose scenario A,
the present value of the property
is $9,285,714 which is less than what we got under scenario B.
The conclusion is that we should redevelop
this property because this would generate higher
wealth as indicated by the larger present value.
