
PROFESSOR: This question teaches you
how to find a present value of an annuity.
Suppose that you have an outstanding loan that requires
ten annual payments of $2,300.
Now is Year 0, and the next payment on the loan
is due next year.
The last payment is due in Year 10.
There is a bank account that offers 5% annual interest rate.
You would like to make a deposit into this account today, which
would allow you to repay this loan.
The first part of this question asks
you to find the amount that you need to deposit.
The second question asks you to demonstrate
that the amount you deposited is indeed
enough to repay this loan.
Let's start with the first question.
The money you need to deposit is the present value
of these payments discounted at 5%.

To find the present value, we can use the annuity formula.
Present value would equal to $2,300, which
is our annual payment, divided by 5%, multiplied by 1 minus 1
divided by 1 plus 5%, raised to the power of 10
because we have 10 payments.
This would equal to $17,760.
Let me demonstrate that if we discount
annual payments by hand, we will get the same answer.
Let me start with the first payment
and find its present value.
I will take the payment itself, and I will divide it
by 1 plus discount rate.
Raise to the power of 1 because this payment
occurs one year from now.
If I extend this array all the way to Year 10,
this will give me the present value of each
of these individual payments.
For example, the very last cell gives me
the present value of the last payment, $2,300,
discounted to the present.
We are raising it to power of 10 because this payment occurs
in Year 10.
To find the total value of these payments in present value
terms, we will just add them up.

This gives us exactly $17,760, the same value that we obtained
by using the annuity formula.
Let's answer the second part of this question
by demonstrating that depositing $17,760
is enough to fully repay this loan.
We're beginning Year 1 with this much money in our bank account.
During this first year, the bank pays us 5% interest rate
on this amount.
So the interest that we earned would
equal to the beginning balance multiplied
by the interest rate of 5%.

At the end of Year 1, we are making our annual payment.
And therefore, the end balance would
equal to the beginning balance plus the interest
that you earned minus the payment that we made.
Then, we're starting second year by having this much money
in our bank account.
During this year, we're still earning 5% interest
on this balance.
And we're making the same payments.
And we're ending this year with the balance
in our account of $14,865.
Now, let's see what happens if we extend these
arrays all the way to Year 10.
We will see that we will start Year 10 by having
$2,190 in our bank account.
During this year, we're earning 5% interest on this beginning
balance, which is exactly enough to pay
$2,300 at the end of this year, which leaves us
with the balance of exactly $0.
We just demonstrated that depositing $17,760 now
into a bank account that pays the annual interest rate of 5%
is enough to repay this loan.
Overall, what we learned in this question
is how to find a present value of a stream of cash flows
that represents an annuity.