
PROFESSOR: Let's start by assuming
that the annual distribution amount equals
to c, similar to what we did in part a of this question.
Then we can write down the present value
of this stream of distributions from Jeff Bezos' foundation.
It's going to equal to c-- this is the current distribution--
plus c divided by 1 plus r-- this is the present value
of the second distribution, which will happen one year from
today--
plus c divided by 1 plus r squared--
this is the present value of the third distribution, which will
happen two years from now--
plus c divided by 1 plus r raised to the power of 3,
which is the present value of the fourth distribution, which
will happen three years from now, and so forth.
Now, we need to find the present value of this amount
on the right hand side of this equation.
To do this, notice that this part of the equation
is just the regular perpetuity.
And we already know the present value
of the regular perpetuity.
Therefore, we can write down this equation as such.
So the present value of this stream of cash flows
equals to c plus c divided by r.
Now, we know that the present value
of the pledged amount to the foundation is $10 billion.
Given that the interest rate is 8%,
we can solve this equation for the annual payment amount.
So the annual payment amount c would
equal to the present value divided
by 1 plus 1 divided by r.
Plugging in the numbers, $10 billion and 8% interest rate,
would get $740,740,740.
Therefore, the annual distribution amount
will be around $741 million.
Note that if Jeff Bezos starts distributing funds
in one year from now, the annual perpetual distribution amount
will be $800 million.
If on the other hand, he starts distributing money immediately,
this lowers the annual perpetual distribution amount
to $741 million.
This does make economic sense due to the fact
that the immediate distribution lowers the balance of funds
on the foundation's balance sheet,
and therefore lowers its ability to earn 8% annual interest
rate on this amount.