
PROFESSOR: Now, suppose that the expected future annual rate
of inflation is 2%.
If Jeff Bezos wants to distribute
an equal annual amount in today's dollars
to guarantee purchasing power of distributed funds,
how much would the annual distribution amount be?
Assume that the first distribution
happens one year from now.
Suppose that the annual distribution from the fund
equals c dollars.
Let's denote by i the annual rate of inflation.
Future distributions from the fund
need to grow at the same rate as the inflation
to guarantee their purchasing power.
In year one, for example, distribution
should equal to c times 1 plus i.
More generally, in the year t, distribution amount would equal
c times 1 plus i raised to the power of t.
For example, in the year two, distribution amount
would be c times 1 plus i raised to the power of 2.

Let's put these distributions on the timeline.
For comparison, let's also draw a stream
of payments that represent a regular growing perpetuity.
Notice that the two streams look alike with one difference.
For regular perpetuity, the first payment in year one
is c and the second payment in year two is c times 1
plus g, where g is the growth rate.
In our case, however, the first payment
is c times 1 plus i and the second payment
is c times 1 plus i squared.
Now, mathematically, we can make our stream of payments
look like a regular perpetuity if we
factor 1 plus the rate of inflation term out.
To see this, let's write down the present value
of our stream, which is present value
equals to c times 1 plus i divided
by 1 plus r plus c multiplied by 1 plus i squared divided by 1
plus r squared and so forth.
Factoring 1 plus i out gives us the following expression--
present value equals to 1 plus i multiplied
by c divided by 1 plus r plus c multiplied by 1
plus i divided by 1 plus r squared, and so forth.
The expression inside large brackets
looks just like a regular perpetuity.
Hence, its present value is just c divided by r minus i.
And therefore, the present value of our stream
is 1 plus i multiplied by c divided by r minus i.

All that's left here is to find c in this expression.
Remember that we are given the present value, which
is the amount that Jeff Bezos pledged
to the foundation, which is $10 billion.
Given the interest rate of 8%, we
can solve this equation for payment amount c.
$10 equals to 1 plus 2%, which is the rate of inflation,
multiplied by c divided by 8%, which
is our interest rate, minus 2%, which is the rate of inflation.
Rearranging, this gives us c equals to $10 times
8% minus 2% divided by 1 plus 2%.
This equals to $588,235,294 or roughly $588.2 million.
Note that the value of $588 million
that we found in this question is significantly lower
than the cost and distribution value
that we found in part a which was $800 million.
Intuitively, since we have to adjust for inflation,
we have to start paying a lower amount
so that we have enough funds to guarantee
all the future payments and adjustments for inflation.