
PROFESSOR: Let's talk about the structure of financial markets
and when markets are complete, incomplete, or overcomplete.
We've seen a variety of instruments
in different settings.
We've seen stocks, we've seen bonds,
we've seen derivatives such as options.
Let's take a look at the kinds of instruments
can exist within a marketplace, what kinds of relationships
there might be among them, and what kinds of openings
there are for financial innovation.
So the tools to do that are going
to be basic linear algebra.
And we're going to take a starting example
to get us warmed up to the subject is a simple model
for a one-period market.
So there's going to be an initial time,
we'll call it to equal 0.
And there's one step ahead in the future.
We're going to look at a small number of securities,
and we're going to see what we can say
and how we can characterize the relationships among them.
This model, which we're only going to introduce,
can be developed into a multi-period model, which
can lead to things like the binomial tree model,
and bring us full circle back to things
like the models of continuous time
finance that we've been studying earlier.
However, with an appreciation about the kinds
of relationships that might be available
and that might be required among the different instruments
in the marketplace.
So here's our simple model.
Let's take a look.
So our first model is going to be
a one-period model where there are two times, time 0 and time
1.
And we're going to have four securities in this market.
So let's take a look at what they are, and then we'll
see how we can model this using simple concepts
from linear algebra.
So the securities that we have are
going to be a bond, a stock, and two call options,
call option with strike 1.5 dollars,
and a call option with strike price of $1.
There are going to be three states of the world.
We're going to imagine the states of the world
as being three possible outcomes.
They might be a good economy, a bad economy, and a pandemic,
or some terrible economy.
So let's just give the names 1, 2, and 3.
This could be any number.
We're keeping it small to make it so the algebra
you can almost do in your head, and the slides
can fit on one page.
This could be any number of discrete states.
We're assuming that they are mutually exclusive
and that they cover all the possibilities.
So the probability up in each state adds up to 1.
So we'll assign a probability 1/2, 1/6, and 1/3.
One of the fascinating things that we're about to see
is that these probabilities, the real world probabilities
of appearing in these different states,
don't matter at all for the pricing relationships
that we're going to explore.
So what about each of the options?
Well, we would like to know how much it's worth in the future.
We're going to assume that the price now is fixed.
We're not going to say yet what it is.
We'll get to that in a bit.
But we're going to ask what the future value is going to be,
and this is known as the payoff.
So the payoff for a risk-free bond
is going to be defined as $1 in the future.
What makes it risk-free is not that it's $1,
it's that the outcome doesn't depend on what state
of the world we're in.
The stock, on the other hand, is going to be a risky asset.
The amount that it's worth depends on which state
we're in.
It could be worth $3.
It could be worth $2.
It could be worth $1.
It might even be worth less than the value of the bond.
The call option, however, is determined
based on the value of the stock because it's
a call option on that stock.
So, if the strike price is 1 and a half dollars
and the stock price finishes in one period at $3,
then it's worth 1 and a half dollars
because we could exercise it immediately
to buy stock for 1 and a half dollars, sell it for 3,
and capture a value of 1 and a half.
Similarly, if the stock price is $2,
we could buy at 1 and a a half, sell at $2,
make it a profit of $0.50.
But the value is 0 in the lowest state of the world
because we're not going to buy a stock for $1.50 if the market
price is $1.
Our second option, the call option
with a strike price of $1, is worth $2
in this state of the world, $1 in this state of the world,
and 0, again, if the market price exceeds
the value of the call option.
You can extend this with puts, with other options
of other strikes, and so on.
So, what did we leave out?
Well, this is very-- first of all,
we only have three states of the world.
We've left out a lot of possibilities
that these values might have.
We're assuming that we can buy or sell these freely,
and that we can hold any quantity that we'd
like to have.
But we're going to start with this idealized market
where there are no market frictions.
And we're going to see what these relationships
among the future payoffs imply about these instruments.
So let's group these numbers together the payoffs
that are received for each security
in each state of the world, an object we're going
to call the payoff matrix.
So let there be n different securities
and s states of the world.
In our example n is equal to 4, s is equal to 3.
And we're going to represent the payoffs
for each security at our fixed time in the future
as being a column vector of length s.
And we're going to collect them in the form of a payoff matrix.
So the payoff matrix is a mapping from Rn to Rs.
So Rn, where we've got four different securities,
tells us which securities we have.
And for each security, we're going
to see what it's payoffs are.
And there are three possibilities
for the payoffs, Rs.
So in our example where n is 4 and s
is 3 and the numbers of the ones I
showed you on the previous table,
this would be the payoff matrix.
The first column represents the payoff of the risk-free bond.
In states 1, 2, and 3, it receives $1.
So how would we represent that as a vector
in our initial space Rn?
Well, we could represent that by a vector, say, that is x--
I may not be consistent in keeping arrows
over all of my vectors--
is 1, 0, 0, 0 because I have one bond in the first position.
And that corresponds to my first column.
If I take the matrix A acting on the vector x, I get--
because this is a unit vector--
I get the first column, so I would get 1, 1, 1.
If I change my vector, for example,
I look at a vector corresponding to a single share of stock,
let's call this x2, that would be represented by 0, 1, 0, 0.
And A acting on x2 gives 3, 2, 1.
What if I have a mixed portfolio with stocks and bonds?
Well, suppose I have a vector.
Let's call it x.
And say that it's equal to qB, qs, 0, 0,
where qB is the number of bonds I have and qs
is the number of stocks that I have,
then the payoff Ax is obviously going to be qB times 1,
1, 1, plus qs times 3, 2, 1.
That is to say, portfolios form a vector space.
So I can write x as being qB times the first basis vector
plus--

plus I have a jumpy pen--

qs times 0, 1, 0, 0.
And remember that this is a linear algebra.
So a matrix multiplication applies
to the rules of linearity.
So I can say that A times x in this case
is going to be A acting on qB, qs, 0, 0,
which is A acting on qB times 1, 0, 0, 0 plus qs times 0, 1, 0,
0.
And, by our usual rules of linearity,
this is going to be qB times A of 1, 0, 0, 0 plus qs
of A acting on 0, 1, 0, 0.
And then we get the result that I wrote down before.
Remember that A acting on the first basis vector
gives us the first column of the matrix.
A acting on the second basis vector
gives us the second column and so on.
So we're finally left with our value
is going to be qB plus 3 qs in the first state of the world,
qB plus 2 qs in the second state of the world,
and qB plus qs in the third state
of the world for our portfolio with qB bonds and qs stocks.