PROFESSOR: So, in general, we have portfolios
that are represented as a vector of the quantities held
for each security.
Those are elements in Rn.
And, when we act on it with A, we
have a linear payoff for the simple reason
that three stocks are worth three times more than one.
500 bonds are worth 500 times more than a single bond.
And the value of a bunch of stocks and bonds in a portfolio
is equal to the value of the stocks
plus the value of the bonds, perfect setting for linearity.
It's really not very complicated.
So we have a portfolio to represent
the vector of quantities.
And the payoff matrix acts to tell us what the payoff is.
So, if I have this vector, which represents being short one
bond, long two shares of stock, short two call
options of strike 1 and 1/2, and short one call
option of strike 1, what is the payoff of this portfolio?
Well, the payoff of the portfolio
is a linear combination of the payoffs
of the individual assets.
And we get it by doing matrix multiplication.
And, if you check, you'll find that the payoff
of that particular portfolio vector
is 0 in the first state of the world,
1 in the second state of the world,
and 1 in the last state of the world.
And, if you want, you can either do the matrix multiplication,
or, in simple cases, you can notice
that what matrix multiplication really does
is it gives us a linear combination
of the columns in the matrix.
That is I'm taking minus 1 times this column
plus 2 times this column minus twice
this column minus this column.
And, when I take that linear combination,
it's the same thing as A times x, and I get this value.
So it's very simple.
Given a vector x, you want to know the payoff.
You multiply with the matrix A. Do the matrix multiplication,
and there's your payoff.
What about going the other way around?
Would you have been able to answer
if I asked you, here's A, here's the payoff I'd like to get--
0, 1, 1-- is there a portfolio that produces this payoff?
So this is actually, in many ways,
a fundamental question of the design
of financial instruments, which is, if there's
a demand for a particular kind of payoff,
is it possible to construct a portfolio of instruments that
are available in the marketplace that produces a desired payoff?
In a complete market, the answer is yes.
And, in incomplete market, the answer is no.

So, in other words, what we're asking
is how to solve a general linear equation.
And this is the most basic problem in linear algebra.
Suppose we have a payoff, a target, that we want
that's given by a vector b.
And we have a payoff matrix A. And we'd
like to solve the equation Ax equals b.
That is we'd like to find x, the portfolio, whose payoff is
some given constant that we've prespecified b.
So, as you know, in linear algebra,
this could be one number of equations
and some other number of variables.
We have s equations and n variables in this case.
And, depending on whether n is bigger or smaller or the same
as s and depending on some other relationships,
we might have a unique answer.
We might have multiple answers.
Or we might have none.
So let's take the simplest case.
If A is non-singular and there's a unique-- and n is equal to s,
then there's a unique solution.
If A is non-singular, we take the inverse.
x is equal to A inverse b, and we're done.
So what are the conditions required for that?
Well, A has to be invertible.
So the columns of A need to be independent.
The rows do also.
That means that the rank of A has to be full rank.
In our example, we could be 3 by 3.
The securities are not redundant.
That is there's no linear relationship among the payoffs
and the securities.
We can't write one of the columns
as a linear combination of the others.
That's what it means for them to be independent.
And we need the same number of securities
as states, obviously, for the matrix
to be square so it can be inverted.
What if n equals s doesn't hold?
Well, if n is less than s, if the number of securities
is smaller than the number of states in our financial model,
then, in general, there's not going to be any solution.
So, for an arbitrary b, there may not be a solution.
We just have more states than we have securities.
There's no way that we can solve the problem in general.
We might be able to solve it for some special cases.
So there might be some special b's--
that is vectors that lie in the image
space of the linear transformation A--
where there is a solution, but not for all possible b's.
So we might have, for example, a two-dimensional subspace
where there are certain payoffs that we could create,
but not any possible payoff.
On the other hand, what happens if we have more securities
than we have states?
Well, in that case, there might or might not be a solution.
But, in any event, they're probably not
unique because, if n is greater than s,
then some vectors need to get mapped to 0.
The target space is smaller than the initial space.
And that space of vectors that can mapped to 0
is known as the kernel or the null space.
And one of the interesting things
is, because A acting on an element of this null space
is equal to 0, we can add--
that means that an element of the null space or of the kernel
has zero payoff.
That means that we could add it to any portfolio
and still have the same payoff.
So these are our possibilities.
We could have n equal to s, n less than s, or n greater
than s.
What really is going to matter, though, is
the rank of the matrix.
So market completeness is defined as follows.
A complete market is one in which every possible payoff can
be generated by some portfolio.
One way to say that is that the image of A
is the full space of payoffs.
Another way to say it is that the rank of A is equal to s.
That is that the vectors that can
be reached by acting with A on something
is equal to the dimension of the target space.
And, equivalently, we could say that the linear transformation
is onto or surjective.
That means it covers the entire target space.
And, if the market isn't complete,
well, then it's incomplete.
So an incomplete market is one in which
there exists some payoffs that can't
be generated by any portfolio.
So that means that the image of A
is smaller than the entire space of payoffs.
So it's a proper subspace within the space of payoffs.
In the example I gave before, it would
be a space of lower dimensions.
Equivalently, the rank of A is less than s,
which is the number of independent states
of the world.
So, intuitively, we need for a complete market
to have at least as many securities
as there are states in the world.
That might not be enough because, if we
have a lot of securities, but the securities are really
just similar to each other, then they
may not generate anything new, but it's certainly necessary.
And, if we have fewer securities than states, than
we necessarily have an incomplete market.