
PROFESSOR: Now, I mentioned before
that we might have securities that aren't independent.
We might have more securities than there
are states of the world.
And we might have securities that actually are not
really needed, that are equivalent to other securities.
And, at first glance, we might think
that that would be superfluous.
But we do it all the time.
Just because we have $1 bills in the American economy,
$5 bills are superfluous.
You can make a 5 out of five 1's.
And you can make a 20 out of four 5's.
But we do have these different instruments
because they're convenient.
Now, there are no arbitrage relationships among them.
You would be hard pressed to find someone who's
going to trade you at a different rate
$5 bills for $10 bills than the expected
ratio between their face values.
But, when we're talking about instruments that are risky,
unlike risk-free instruments like dollar bills,
the answer isn't always so obvious.
And markets do have a lot of room for extra instruments.
And we'll see that these are really valuable.
So we have a notion from our study
of options that options in a certain sense
are different instruments than stocks
because they have different payoffs.
On the other hand, because they can be dynamically hedged
using stocks, there's a sense in which the payoff in an option
can be replicated, albeit dynamically,
by a portfolio of stock.
So how do we look at this?
Well, let's take a look at our world, which
is not very dynamic.
It's only got one period.
So the structure is going to be a lot simpler.
So in complete and incomplete markets,
we could have redundant securities.
And that occurs when securities or sets of securities
have payoffs that are linearly dependent.
We often say that that means that one or more
securities have payoffs that can be
replicated by a portfolio of other securities.
And really, if one portfolio can replicate another,
we usually can turn it around in either direction.
Mathematically, that's equivalent of saying
that the kernel or the null space of A is non-empty,
or the dimension of the kernel of A is bigger than 0
if you want.
That means that there are portfolios
that have zero payoff because, if we take
that portfolio, a portfolio of zero payoffs,
we add it to some portfolio that has a payoff that we want.
The resulting portfolio is a different portfolio
with the same payoff.
That's what we mean by redundant.
Redundant means there are multiple portfolios that
have the same payoff.
Now, in this case, we know that the kernel of a linear operator
is itself a vector space.
So, obviously, if I add some element of the kernel,
I could add some multiple of the kernel as well.
If we want to look at this on the blackboard,
suppose that we have a portfolio that
is equal to a given target.
So x is our portfolio.
b is our payoff.
A is the payoff matrix.
And suppose that z is an element of the kernel of A.
Mathematically, that just means--
all I'm saying is that A acting on z is equal to 0.
And it means I'm always leaving out the trivial case where
z is a non-zero vector.
So, if A acting on z is equal to 0,
what happens to the portfolio?
Suppose I consider the portfolio--
let's call at x prime--
to be x plus an arbitrary constant times z.
Well, the payoff on x prime is A acting
on x prime, which is A acting on x
plus cz, which, by linearity, is A acting on x
plus c times A acting on z.
The first term is equal to b.
And the second term is equal to 0 because A acting on 0
is equal to 0.
So we see that, if I have a non-zero z,
I have a one-parameter family of solutions,
of redundant securities of portfolios, all of which
have the same payoff.
So, if redundant securities exist,
then we don't have a unique association between portfolios.
The payoff is not one to one.
But, for a given portfolio, for a given x, we know what b is.
We act with A on x.
We get a definite answer by doing matrix multiplication.
But, for a given payoff b, there might
be more than one portfolio that solves the equation.
So, just as I showed you on the blackboard,
we can take any solution.
We can add to it a multiple of any arbitrage portfolio.
And it's going to have the same payoff.
Now, in an incomplete market, the existence of solutions
depends on b.
So there might be no solutions at all.
But, if there is a portfolio that has a solution,
then there's going to be an infinite number of solutions.