
PROFESSOR: Let's take a look at an example.
So suppose I have this reduced payoff matrix.
Suppose I have a world with three securities, and I have--
so I have three securities represented
by the first columns.
Think of them as being our first three
securities, a bond in column 1, a stock in column 2,
and a call option on stock with strike price 1 and 1/2
in column 3, but no fourth security.
And I have three states of the world.
So now my payoff matrix is 3 by 3.
And suppose the payoff I'm interested in
is 2, 1, 0, which, incidentally, was the column that we
lopped off from our matrix.
But suppose we asked a question.
Can the K equals 1 call option, column b, the vector 2, 1,
0, be replicated from the other three securities?
So why don't you take a moment to think about that?
See if you can come up with a three vector
x such that A acting on x is equal to b.
Or can you show that there's no such thing that exists?

Well, A is invertible.
So let's invert it.
If we invert A, we can find it has this form.
I did this numerically.
Generally, you're not going to want
to invert any matrix larger than 2 by 2 in your head.
You should know how to do a 2 by 2 matrix in your head.
But, in this case, here's A inverse.
So, because A is invertible, we have a unique solution for x.
So not only is there a solution for x.
It's unique, and the solution is the portfolio
minus 1, 1, which is equivalent to being
long one share of stock and short one bond.
And you can see that.
Look at the second column here.
Subtract the first column.
And we get 2, 1, 0.
So I take 3 minus 1 and 2 minus 1 and 1 minus 1.
And that gives me this column.
So you can see it by inspection, and the third column
doesn't matter at all.

Therefore, the fourth security in our original payoff matrix
is redundant.
So, in our original payoff matrix
where we had four securities and three states of the world,
because the fourth column, 2, 1, 0, can
be written as a linear combination,
because its payoff is equivalent to be long the stock and short
the bond, it's a redundant security.
We have an overcomplete market.
Its payoffs is identical to a portfolio of basis assets.
And that tells us that we have more securities than we need,
and one of them is redundant.
How about this example?
Let's reduce things even further.
Suppose I remove the call option.
Can the K equals 1 call be replicated
from two other securities?
Well, this is a little bit different.
We know that it can, but we also know that the matrix is not
invertible in this case.
In fact, the matrix is a 3 by 2 matrix.
So it's not invertible because it isn't even square.
There's no chance of inverting it.
But a solution still exists.
So this is what we said that, when we have a 3 by 2 matrix,
we're taking two vectors into a three-dimensional space.
There's no way that we can hit all possible three
vectors and all possible payoffs,
but we can hit some of them.
And this is one of those lucky payoffs that we can hit.
So, in this case, if we pick x to be the same portfolio, short
a bond, long a stock, even though we have only two
securities, we still can get this payoff,
but there are some payoffs that we can't get.

Another example, suppose we include in our security world
the K equals 1 call.
And now let's kick out the K equals 1 and 1/2 call and ask
if it can be replicated from the other three securities.
What do you think?
Can you find a linear combination
of these three securities that gives b as a payoff?

Well, the rank of the matrix is 2.
We know it's singular because we know
the third column is a linear combination of the first two.
We've already seen that.
So A is not invertible.
And, actually, this option can't be replicated.
And this market then would be incomplete
because there are payoffs, such as 1.5, 0.5, and 0, that do not
have portfolios to create them.
And that's true whether I include the stock and the bond,
which are independent securities,
or whether I add a redundant security.
Obviously, adding the third column
doesn't help me any because the third column just
has the same information and the same possibilities
as the first two since I'm already free to make portfolios
from them.
So, in this case, we've got an incomplete market where
here's an example of a payoff that cannot be replicated
by the other three securities.
One of those three securities is linearly
dependent on the others.
That means that the rank is not full rank,
and it's not invertible.
If they were independent, if the matrix were invertible,
then we'd have a unique solution.

A complete market is one in which
we can get any payout from a portfolio of our basis assets.
So, in a complete market, the payoff matrix
has rank equal to the number of states.
In our example of a three-dimensional state
space means that the matrix needs to have rank 3.
If, in addition, we have three securities, or we have n
equals s, then we don't have extra redundant securities.
It means that we have a matrix of full rank.
So, if n is equal to s--
so it's a square matrix--
and the rank is equal to the number of rows and columns,
then there's an inverse.
And then there's a unique solution for any b.
And you might think that's the best possible case,
but, actually, it's kind of boring because, in finance, we
often like to find ways of constructing
new instruments for which there might be a demand.
And, sometimes, they are actually technically redundant,
but there's an interesting market use for them.
If n is bigger than s, though, and the matrix has rank s--
so, if n is bigger than s, of course, the rank of the matrix
can't be bigger than the smaller of the number of rows
and columns.
So, whether n is bigger or smaller than s,
the rank of a matrix can't be more than the number of rows
or the number of columns, whichever is smaller,
but, if n is bigger than s and the matrix has rank s,
then we have an overcomplete set of securities.
We have a redundant set.
What we can do is, to get a complete basis,
we can pick any s securities that are linearly independent,
have independent payoffs, and we can drop the extra ones.
So, in our example before, in the case
where we had the K equals 1 call option, we could drop that one
and keep the other three, which are linearly independent.
If we have more securities and more complicated matrices,
we just need a set of vectors that span the space.
So they can form a basis, provided
that they span the space and they have rank s.
And we can reduce things to a square matrix that
produces all of the payoffs.
So we have these properties for the rank of a matrix, which
you should review if they're not familiar, that, first of all,
that the rank of a matrix is equal to the rank
of a transpose.
And it's equal to the smaller-- it's
less than or equal to the smaller
of the number of the rows or columns that we have.
And, if we have a product of two matrices,
remember that, when we have linear transformations,
we usually read them from right to left
because that's the way in which they act on vectors.
And, if one transformation reduces the size of the space,
then that carries forward the rest of the way.
So, in a product, the rank of a product
is never going to be greater than the smaller of the rank
of the two matrices.
And, if I have a product of A times A transpose,
that's going to be equal to the rank of A.
