
PROFESSOR: What about security prices?
So far, we just talked about payoffs, future payoffs
for securities.
What about the prices?
And why do we talk about payoffs instead of returns
on securities, how we usually think about it?
Well, for prices, let's represent them by a vector S.
And what's the dimension of the space?
Well, it's going to be n.
There's going to be one price for each security in our space.
And, if we want to compute the market value of a portfolio,
we use the standard rule for computing the market
value of any portfolio.
We take the quantity of securities, x
sub i of security of type i.
We multiply times the price.
And we sum over the portfolio.
We can write this in matrix notation
as a row vector times a column vector.
Or we can flip it around the other way.
So think of S is related to the adjoint, which can
be written with a transpose.
It can be written with a star sometimes.
But this just means that we're taking S, turning it
into a row vector, and multiplying
times a column vector x.
It's another way of saying we're just
taking the linear sum of each component of S
times each component of x.
The key thing here is, first, we have one price per security
in our portfolio and, second, that the pricing
we can think of as a linear operation on portfolio vectors.
And I can write it like this as S acting on the vector
x, which gives us a real number, which
would be the market value.
Now, in setups where we're thinking about applications
in derivative pricing, we often talk about future payoffs.
And, later on, we don't talk about the return on a security
because we sometimes are going to talk
about arbitrage portfolios and portfolios that
might have zero value.
And, if they have non-zero payoffs on the future,
then they would have infinite return
if we're dividing by something.
So we're going to talk about payoffs because those
are positive numbers that we're going to have in the future.
And, generally, they're going to be
non-zero values for securities, but we're not
having any denominators.
So we're only going to keep the numerators.
So we've seen that we have a vector space of portfolios,
so of dimension, in our starting example, of 4.
We have a vector space of prices,
which is the same dimension, but it's not the same vector space.
Remember, in a vector space, you can add vectors,
but prices are measured in dollars.
The portfolio space, they're measured
in shares or numbers or quantities of bonds.
And you can't add $10 per share, the value of S, to 15 shares.
You can multiply them and get something,
which dollars per share times shares
gives you something in dollars, but you
can't add them together.
So these are two quantities, which
are both vectors, S and x.
We can multiply them in this way to get a scalar.
But, even though they're of the same dimension,
we don't add them.
They're actually in different vector spaces,
which are called dual spaces.
One of them is dual to the other if it has the same dimension
and it acts linearly.
That's why, in this picture, we can
think of prices as acting on portfolios to give us
market values.