
PROFESSOR: Let's talk about arbitrage.
And I'm going to talk about two kinds of arbitrage.
And we'll call them type I and type II.
What's type I arbitrage?
So type I arbitrage says you pay nothing now,
and you get something later.
So type I arbitrage is something for nothing.
The idea is that, right now, the value of a portfolio
is either 0 or it's negative.
Negative value means that, when you buy it,
you get a negative amount of money.
That means you get paid to own this portfolio.
So suppose I have a portfolio.
So I have a marketplace where the prices are given.
They're given by us.
I pick a portfolio x.
And suppose that there exists a portfolio such that S acting
on x gives a value that's negative, that's less than
or equal to 0.
Let's say it's negative, or it's equal to 0.
And suppose, later on, that there's
a non-negative-- there are only non-negative payoffs,
and at least one payoff is 0.
So if it's purely equal-- if it's the zero vector,
that would be trivial.
But, otherwise, what we want to have is, in the future,
some states could have a zero payoff,
but there's at least one state in the future that's positive.
And none of the future states are negative.
So, in this case, this would be terrific.
This is no risk.
I either pay nothing, or I get paid.
And there's no way I can lose in the future.
So basic common sense and finance theory
say that this kind of thing shouldn't
exist in the marketplace.
If it did, people would exploit it,
and it would disappear very quickly.
Therefore, it's going to serve on a constraint about the kinds
of market structures and pricing relationships
that we might observe.
So the notation here, I do want to point out
one thing, which is not standard in linear algebra.
Most of what we do will be.
But, normally, we don't write vector inequalities like this.
So, in this case, here's precisely what I mean.
What I mean is that this holds for all the components, OK?
So each of the components has this inequality.
Some of the components can be 0.
None of them can be negative.
But I'm also going, when I write this,
to require that at least one component is positive.
And, since there's no other notation for it,
I'm going to steal this one and torture it slightly
for our purposes.
But common sense and our ideas about arbitrage
should tell you what we mean.
And the case where everything is 0
is certainly going to be a trivial case.
So this is type I arbitrage, something
for nothing with no risk.
Let's try an example.
Suppose I have a securities market
with two securities, a stock and a bond,
and there are three states of the world.
And the prices are given by the vector S equals 1, 1.
And I look at the portfolio that's
short a bond and long a stock.
Then S acting on x, the market value of the portfolio,
is 0 because they have equal prices,
and I'm long one and short the other.
And the payoff matrix acting on x is 2, 1, 0.
And that's what we said would constitute an arbitrage.
The value of the portfolio is 0 or negative.
In this case, it's 0.
And the payoffs are non-negative, and at least one
of them is positive.
Now, what if we were to change the prices?
This is for this particular set of prices.
Can we say something about prices
that would prevent arbitrage from occurring?
So consider this.
Can arbitrage be avoided in this example?
Three choices-- yes if S2 is greater than 1,
yes if S1 is less than 0--
less than 1, or no, arbitrage can't be avoided at all.