
PROFESSOR: So the answer in this case
is yes, provided that S2 is bigger than S1.
In that case, we'll have a positive price
for this portfolio.
And there's no contradiction.
The problem here was that the stock stochastically
dominates the bond we say in technical terms.
Or, in common sense, the stock is always
better than or equal to the bond in each state of the world.
No matter what the possible outcome is,
the stock is as good or better.
It has a payoff equal to or greater than that of the bond.
So its price must be higher.
That's a very easy case to consider.

Type II arbitrage, in contrast to type I arbitrage,
is a case where there are redundant assets.
And, in this case, that means that there
are non-trivial solutions to the payoff matrix equation,
Ax equals 0.
That means that A is less than the rank S.
And it means that there's a non-trivial kernel
to the matrix A.
So type II arbitrage says that, if there's
a portfolio with zero payoff, then it has a non-zero price.
So our previous example, in type I,
we could get something for nothing.
And, in this case, you get nothing for something.
So all that's required for type II arbitrage
is that a portfolio that has zero payoff
has a non-zero price.
And we don't even care whether it's
a positive or a negative price because we
could go long or short, whichever sign we
need to make money for free.
That is we're going to collect money
by selling a portfolio that has no payoffs at all.
And we can get money in the present.
Again, that's the kind of thing that shouldn't really
be allowed in a well functioning,
properly set up security market.
So let's take a look at an example.
In this case, let's go back to our original payoff
matrix example A. And let's consider this portfolio--
1, 2, 1, 5-- so one bond, two shares
of stock, and six call options of the different strikes.
And consider-- so that's my pricing vector.
And then consider this particular portfolio.
Well, A acting on this portfolio,
because the last security is a redundant security,
this has zero payoff, but it has a non-zero price.
That means it permits arbitrage.
What we expect to have to avoid arbitrage
is that, if the payoff is zero, the price must be zero.
Violating that is type II arbitrage.
So can we change the prices so that we could avoid arbitrage
in this market?