
PROFESSOR: The answer is yes, provided
that the pricing relationships are
consistent with the redundant securities.
That is, since the fourth security
can be thought of as a linear combination of the first two,
its price should be consistent with that.
So, if the value of the fourth security,
the k equals 1 call option, is the price
of the stock minus the price of the bond
and it can be replicated by owning one share of the stock
and shorting one bond, then S times x,
the market value of the portfolio, of any portfolio,
is going to be consistent.
And the market value of this portfolio is going to be 0.
So we have a rule.
We have a law.
And it's called the law of one price.
The law of one price says that different portfolios
that have the same payoff have to have the same price.
That ensures an absence of arbitrage.
And it does mean that there are unique prices for securities
in the market.
Prices are linear.
So we have a linear combination of assets in a portfolio.
And, for valuing the portfolio, the market value
is going to be a linear combination of prices.
In mathematical terms and algebraic terms,
we would say that, if the payoffs are the same--
if I have two portfolios, x1 and x2,
the payoffs are the same if A acting on x1 is A acting on x2.
That says the two portfolios have the same payoff.
Then S acting on x1 and S acting on x2 have be equal.
Notice that this equation involves a row vector
S acting on the vector--
on the vector x.
This is a matrix equation acting.
And this needs to hold for both vectors.
Now, we can rewrite this.
And we can subtract the A x2 from this equation,
and we can write this on the left
by saying that A acting on the difference
vector between x1 and x2 is 0.
Well, A acting on a vector that gives 0
says that x1 minus x2 is in the kernel of A.
It's a non-zero vector that is taken into 0 by the payoff
matrix.
It's an arbitrage portfolio.
If x1 equals x2, then this is trivial.
So we're always considering the non-trivial case.
That means-- again, doing the same trick,
subtracting on the second equation, that
means that the price of the arbitrage portfolio, x1
minus x2, has to be 0.
That's the law of one price.
We avoid arbitrage by saying that non-zero portfolios that
have zero payoffs must have zero price.
And that's required by the absence of type II arbitrage.
Now, we can use no-arbitrage pricing among the basis assets
to price any other asset with any portfolio.
And there are two ways that we might think about pricing.
We might think about relative and absolute pricing.
And, in this picture, like our derivative pricing models
that we looked at in continuous time,
we're thinking about relative pricing
of one asset relative to another or relative to a set of assets.
So no-arbitrage pricing tells us about relationships
that exist among assets given prices
of a certain set of assets.
If there are other assets that are not independent,
their prices need to be uniquely determined.
That's different from absolute pricing where
we say what the price of a stock should
be based on reading its balance sheet,
its earnings report, and so on, a bunch of external variables.
Here we're looking at self-consistent relationships
among securities that exist in a market.
And we don't have any view necessarily about how
that ties in to external observables
or values in the real world.

So we have the law of one price.
And, using this, we can ask whether a given
model of a marketplace is arbitrage free or not.
Furthermore, we can impose this as a constraint.
If we're thinking about building models
or we're thinking about introducing new securities
and designing new kinds of financial products,
we want to make sure that it's arbitrage free.
Certainly, if we're selling products,
we don't want to be the ones getting arbitraged.
We can take advantage of an arbitrage
with other participants.
That might be of interest, but, normally, we
would assume that everyone has the same insights,
the same information, and the same access.
And a sensible starting point and really a fairly
minimum requirement on any marketplace
is that it should be arbitrage free.
But this does give us constraints
on what might be present in the marketplace.
So this is going to lead us to the fundamental theorem
of asset pricing, at least in our simple, one-period model.