
PROFESSOR: What are state prices?
We have a model which has, say, three states of the world.
And we began by describing things
in terms of natural basis vectors.
We introduced one element of our-- one dimension
of our vector space for each security we had.
And what we'd like to do is do something
in a corresponding way with respect to the payoff space.
So we'd like to think about having one security or one
portfolio that's associated with each possible state
of the world.
Now, to do that, we've talked about associating
states of the world with different payoffs.
So a natural thing that we could look for
is a security or a portfolio that
has unit payoff in each state of the world.
Remember, we began with basis vectors
where a unit vector in our n-dimensional space
corresponded to one unit of a bond, one unit of a stock,
one unit of a given security.
So these securities are known as Arrow-Debreu securities.
We'll call them AD securities for short.
And they're not necessarily tradable securities.
They're portfolios of tradable assets within our original set.
So we'll call them securities, but they're really
different portfolios.
And they have the property, if they exist,
that they are portfolios that have unit payoff so
that A acting on x gives us either 1, 0, 0, 0, 1, 0, or so
on, wherever we are.
So, if we've got a marketplace where
there are s such securities or portfolios,
then the payoff matrix in terms of them
would be the identity matrix.
The first AD security would have payoff one in the first state,
the second one in the second, and so on.
And the payoff matrix would be diagonal.
So that would obviously be a very convenient state
of affairs.
So, in terms of a general payoff matrix,
the AD security could be replicated
if we have some portfolio such that, when A acts on it,
we get a unit vector, but this unit vector, remember, is
in the target space, not in our original space.
So it's in the space of payoffs.
So, if A acting on x has the form of a unit vector
where the payoffs are 0 in all of the states
except they're 1 in one of the states,
those help us form a basis for the space of payoffs.
Now, if A is invertible, then things are pretty nice.
Then we know what they are.
If A is invertible, then I can immediately
solve for the AD securities by taking A inverse acting on unit
vectors in the target space.
The prices of AD securities are called state prices.
So we think about these vectors or portfolios, hypothetically,
that have unit payoff.
Because they've got a positive payoff,
they should have a positive price associated with them.
And, if we collect all of those different prices, the price
of AD security 1, 2, 3, and so on into a vector with values
that we'll call psi 1, psi 2, up through psi s,
those prices are called state prices.
By our rules for no arbitrage, they have to be positive.

Let's take a look at an example.
Suppose we have a payoff matrix, our old friend
A, this 4 by 3 matrix.
And suppose I consider these vectors, x1 and x2.
Well, I'm on my way.
A acting on x1 is equal to 1, 0, 0.
If you take a look at that, we have unit payoff.
If I take this column plus twice this column
and I subtract this column, I'm left
with unit payoff in the first state
and 0 in the other two states.
And you should check that.
Similarly, for the second state, I
can do it with this portfolio.
If I have A acting on--
excuse me, my pointer is lost.
So A acting on the first portfolio gives this result.
A acting on the second portfolio gives this result--
0, 1, 0.
So we can call x1 the first Arrow-Debreu security.
It's really a portfolio in terms of our stocks and bonds
and call options, but this portfolio
has this important property that it has unit payoff in one state
and zero payoff in the other states.
So it's A acting on x is a basis vector in the space of payoffs.
This gives us a basis vector with 1 in the second state
and 0 in the other states.
So what do you think?
Can you find a vector x3 that satisfies the property
that, when the payoff matrix acts
on x3, which is a four-vector, it pays off 0, 0, 1?

Let me give you a few choices to consider.
So here's a question.
What portfolio replicates the AD security for state 3?
And here are four choices--
a, b, c, and d.
Take a look, and see which one of these possible portfolios
could serve as our third AD security, which has
unit payoff only in state 3.