
PROFESSOR: So what did you find?
You could either act with A on each of these vectors
and see what you get and see if you match the required payoff,
0, 0, 1, or you could throw it on a computer
and look at solving this system of linear equations.
For example, in R, we can use the function qr.solve,
which will help us solve non-square systems
of linear equations.
Here's A. Here's our target function.
And this finds a vector x3 such that A acting on x3
is e3, 0, 0, 1.
And here's the solution.
And you notice this was one of the multiple-choice answers
that we had.
But, if that's not the one you got,
don't worry too quickly because it was a little bit of a trick
question.
There was more than one answer.
Because there's a non-zero kernel in our matrix A,
we could add any multiple of this
to any vector that does work as an AD security
and get another one.
And you'll see that one of the other choices
I gave you also works as well because it
differs by an element of the kernel of A.
So suppose we want to find the price of an AD security.
Well, first, we want to apply rules of no arbitrage.
So let's set the bond price equal to 1.
And then, in those terms, the rest
of the bond prices, S2, S3, S4, are independent variables.
So now we have--
we'd like to impose that there's no type II arbitrage.
So we'd like the market price of our x tilde of our arbitrage
portfolio to be 0.
And that tells us that we have this relationship
among the remaining prices that S4
has to be equal to S2 minus S1.
So we use no arbitrage to fix the price of asset 4, which
was our second call option.
So what do we do?
We start with basis assets and our payoff matrix A.
We're given a set of prices in the market.
And maybe we can fix one of them.
We're given a redundant security, x
tilde, which is because our market is overcomplete.
So then its price is given by the linear price
of the replicating portfolio.
And, having fixed that, we can then
determine the price of everything else,
including now our third AD--
our first AD security over here because now we know what S4 is.
S4 is now fixed at S2 minus S1.
And we can compute in terms of now two, not
four independent prices.
We can compute the value, the market price,
of this AD security as 1 minus S2 plus 2 S3.