
PROFESSOR: What can we say about non-redundant assets?
Well, suppose we've got a market with three states,
and we have only one security.
So it's a very simple payoff matrix in this case.
It's just a single column.
And let's give that column a name.
Let's call it a1.
And the price vector is just going
to be a number because there's only one security.
And let's suppose that the market price is 2.
And let's ask if we've got another payoff.
Let's pick something, 1, 1, 2, which certainly is not
a multiple of 1, 2, 3.
Now, let's take a look at what constraints we have
and what we can say about prices.
What can we say about the price of the payoff
b, which is not in the marketplace?
So, remember, b would represent if there were a new security
to be created.
If you were to go out and create a new instrument
and you wanted to sell it in a marketplace
where the only instrument that existed
before was an instrument that had payoffs 1, 2, 3 and you
want to have an instrument that's payoff 1, 1, 2,
you'd certainly like to make sure it avoids arbitrage.
How could you do that?
Well, we do it by comparison with the existing marketplace.
So notice that, because a1 stochastically dominates
b, that because, in every state, each element is
bigger or less than--
excuse me, bigger or greater than the corresponding elements
over here, then we must have that S1
has to be greater than a price that
would be associated with Sb.
So, if this were to be traded or if we
were to consider this combination of payoffs,
the price associated with it must be less than S1.
But we can also get a bound on the other side.
Notice that, if I take one half of a1, then all of my values
are less than those in b.
And, therefore, Sb has to be greater than half
of the price of S1.
So we can say that, in this case,
Sb must be between 1 and 2.
It can't be equal because there would be an arbitrage.
But Sb is allowed to exist in a range avoiding arbitrage
somewhere between 1 and 2.
If the market had been complete, then we
would have had unique prices, but, in an incomplete market,
we get price inequalities for what
might be allowed if there were to be
new securities with new payoffs that
don't correspond to linear combinations of existing
securities.
Let's generalize things a little bit more
and look a little bit more systematically
at how we get those results, apart
from doing it by inspection.
So we've got our vector a1, which
is 1, 2, 3, which is part of our payoff matrix.
We have a price vector, and we have a target payoff vector.
So let's construct the general linear combination, b
minus lambda a, for arbitrary lambda.
Well, what we'd like to do is consider the potential points
of interest where the entries change sign.

That will give us the points where
we have stochastic dominance and constraints when
all of the remaining signs go positive or negative.
So, if we do this, we can find out that, as we vary lambda,
for lambda equal to 1, which was our first case,
we find that's the turning point where one of the elements
goes to 0 and the others go negative.
At lambda equals 1/2, two of the elements go positive,
and one goes to 0.
And lambda equals 2/3 is not as interesting
because, although we set one of them to 0,
the other two securities in this portfolio have opposite sign.