
PROFESSOR: So the reason that the state prices
can be valuable is because we can now characterize
all possible payoffs in terms not just of security prices,
but in terms of the values of the payoffs, which we know need
to have positive state prices.
So the state prices need to be positive
because the payoffs of the elementary AD securities
are positive.
And, in a complete market, all of the payoffs
can be replicated, and they all have a unique price.
So we have positive state prices if and only
if there's no arbitrage.
If the prices are 0 or negative, then there's arbitrage.
We can take some of the AD securities as basis assets,
take those portfolios as basis assets in our original space.
If we drop the set of redundant securities
and we choose as a basis the AD securities,
then we'd have a very simple description of our securities
market.
The payoff matrix would just be the identity.
But we know, in any event, that the payoff--
that the price for any positive payoff, vector b,
is given by the linear combination of the state
prices times the payoffs of those portfolios.
So it's given by psi star b where
psi is the vector of state prices
and b is the vector of payoffs.
So, in terms of the original assets,
let's see how we can rewrite this.
If we write this in terms of the first column of A--
let's let the first column of A be denoted a1--
then the price of it is given by the state price
vector acting on its payoff.
All right, so we take our first-- for example,
in our original matrix A of 3, 2, 1,
if we have a set of state prices,
the state prices applied to the first column give a value S1,
and that would be the market price of the security that
corresponds to the payoff a1.
Similarly, S2, the market price of a2,
is related to the state prices by letting the state price
vector act on the second column of the payoff matrix and so on.
Now, if we group these together, we notice,
if we form a column vector of these, of S1, S2, S3,
we notice that we could write this as a matrix equation.
That is we could say that the row vector S
star is equal to psi star acting on the payoff matrix.
Because this is a row vector, it acts in turn
on each of the column vectors in A.
Finally, we can use the rule that the transpose of a product
is the product of the transposes in the opposite order.
So the transpose of a row vector is a column vector.
This gives us S. And the transpose
of psi transpose A of a row vector times a matrix is--
the transpose is going to be A transpose times psi where
psi is a column vector.
So now we have a relationship between market prices and state
prices.
The market prices are given in terms of the state prices
by multiplying times the transpose of the payoff matrix.