
PROFESSOR: Our basic pricing relationship
between security prices and state prices
is that s is equal to A transpose psi, or A star psi.
This is the adjoint.
So A is a payoff matrix where we n securities,
and market securities in the world.
There are s states of the world that are independent.
We can associate a market price with each of the n securities.
We associate a state price, and there
may be a different number of them, one state
price for each state of the world,
1, 2, 3, 4, up through s.
So the relationship that we expect
is that the prices to be consistent
need to satisfy that s is equal to A star psi.
And there's no arbitrage if and only if the state price
vector is strictly positive.
So we need the state prices to be positive
because each state price corresponds
to some portfolio that has a payoff that is either positive,
in fact, it specifically positive in one state
of the world and 0 in others.
So the state prices must be greater than 0 in order
to avoid type 2 arbitrage.
And they must obey this relationship
to be consistent with the security prices.
Because the payoff matrix takes securities into payoffs,
and therefore A star is what relates
how we relate security--
excuse me-- state prices back to security prices.
So we've seen this for complete markets.
And in incomplete markets, there could be multiple solutions.
There could be an infinite number of solutions for psi.
So if there's at least one solution where psi is always
greater than 0, then we're guaranteed
that there's no arbitrage.
If all the solutions have psi less than or equal to 0,
then there will be arbitrage in the marketplace.
So it's helpful to diagram these relationships
in terms of dual spaces.
So I talked before about the left-hand side of the diagram.
He said that we have one vector space of portfolios.
And in our starting example, this was of dimension four.
We had four securities.
And we could construct portfolios
that are linear combinations of quantities of securities.
So each element of a vector in this space
represent how many of each kind of security we have.
There's another space of identical dimension
of security prices.
And, in this case, there's one price
associated with each security.
Now, we have a vector, excuse me,
we have a matrix A, the payoff matrix, that maps portfolios,
it acts on portfolios.
It's a linear transformation, and it produces eigenvectors
of a different dimension, which I've drawn over here
in this other vector space, that's the space of payoffs
of some different dimension s.
So A acting on x gives us a payoff b.
If we want to know the price of a portfolio x,
we act on it with the security price
vector s by taking a row vector of s times a column vector x.
And now we see we can do exactly the same thing
in terms of payoffs.
If I've got a payoff matrix b, maybe I know the portfolio it
came from, maybe I don't.
But if I've got a payoff matrix b,
then I know what its price has to be
by acting with state prices.
So the state prices might take a row vector.
I act on the payoffs b as a column vector.
And that also gives me the price,
and those prices need to match.
In order for that to hold it has to be the A transpose, which
is the matrix which takes me from state
prices back to security prices has
to give us a relationship that s is equal to A star psi.
And then we'll have a consistent set of pricing relationships.
Why do we bother going through all this?
Because we know what no arbitrage looks
like on the right side of the diagram.
We don't know necessarily what it
looks like on the left side of the diagram.
Because that's just however the marketplace
happened to be described, whatever the securities
are, options, bonds, stocks, many different states
of the world.
But the right-hand side is very clear.
The right-hand side, there's one state for--
there's one dimension for each state of the world.
The state prices have to be positive.
We have a natural association of what the basis vectors are,
and therefore we can build up any payoff
or linear combinations and immediately determine
no arbitrage prices.

Here's an example.
Suppose we're given market with payoff matrix
A and a particular price vector s.
So is there arbitrage in this market?
Well, A is an invertible, but there
is a pseudo-inversion, which is a standard construction
in linear algebra.
And let me just show you how it works.
That if we construct this quantity,
AA transpose inverse times A, this
satisfies the interesting property
that if I multiply by A transpose
on the right-hand side as I do over here,
I get the identity matrix.
It's a 3-by-3 identity matrix.
It's not a 4-by-4, which would be the normal invertible case.
So it's not exactly invertible, but the pseudo-inverse
can act on a particular subspace.
And you can check that that's true here.
In terms of the pseudo-inverse, now I
have a chance of taking a look and finding a solution
for the state price vector.
If I take a look, if I act with the pseudo-inverse,
this 3-by-4 matrix, and I act on the state price
s, then I get this vector, which has positive numbers, which
is a good sign.
And how do we check?
Well, we can check that this satisfies the pricing equation
by acting on the left with A transpose.
And A transpose acting on the left, acting on psi,
gives us our original pricing vector.
So that's the sense in which M is a pseudo-inverse.
Because if we multiply on the right by A star,
it gives us this identity.
And this helps us in this case solve for what the state price
vectors are.
We find that the state price vectors are positive,
and therefore there's no arbitrage.

What other prices are allowed?
Well, that was a particular value.
Suppose I let the third security price vary, and I let it be x.
So, in that case, we can use our pseudo-inverse
to solve this problem, as well.
We have psi is equal to n acting on s, the prices.
And now we notice that it has this form.
Now, it's going to depend on x, it's
a set of linear combinations.
But now we need to impose the condition.
Before, for a particular value of x
that I had on the previous slide, it just checked.
And all the state prices were positive.
But now the state prices are a function of x.
We need to check, we need to enforce
that all of these components of this matrix--
excuse me, of this vector, be positive.
So let's do that.
2x minus 1 has to be greater than 0.
That implies it has to be bigger than a 1/2.
Minus 4x plus 3 is 3 greater than 0.
That tells us that x has to be less than 3/4.
So we have that x is between a 1/2 and 3/4.
And we noticed the third condition
is the same as the first condition.
It doesn't give us anything new.
So if x is anywhere between a 1/2 and 3/4,
that's an allowed security price that will not allow arbitrage.
So if x is equal to 0.7, we would get a state price
vector 0.4, 0.2, 0.4.
All of those values are positive, and we're OK.
We're in good shape.
There's no arbitrage.
Suppose we let another price vary.
So we had one price fixed, the first price of the bond fixed
so we could scale things.
We had the fourth price fixed by no arbitrage,
I have type two arbitrage.
We let the third price vary, now let's let the final price vary.
Now we've got two parameters to solve for, x and y.
And we have a range of prices.
And for each value of x and y we have a different possible state
price vector, which will be given
by this linear combination of assets.
And now we need to ask, what values of x and y
keep us from having arbitrage?
That's in terms of state prices, and will automatically
tell us what are the allowed prices in the marketplace.