
PROFESSOR: In an incomplete market,
there can be multiple solutions psi.
So, for example, consider an incomplete market,
which has two securities, a bond and a stock.
So there are three states, only two securities.
Market is incomplete.
What are we going to do?
Well, suppose we're given the prices of the securities.
And suppose they're $1 for the bond and $2 for the stock.
The matrix A transpose that tells us
how to get from state prices to security
prices, the transposed matrix, is this 2 by 3 matrix, 1, 1, 1,
3, 2, 1.
We notice we can read off a solution
right away because the middle column here is 1, 2.
That's what we're looking for for S.
So, if A star, this transposed matrix,
were to act on the three vector, 0, 1,
0, that would solve our equation.
So that's obviously a solution for the state price vector psi.
But it's not good because it could allow arbitrage.
Remember that every element in the state price vector
has to be positive.
None of its elements can be 0.
If they were 0, that would allow arbitrage.
But it's OK because there's one thing
that we haven't included yet, which
is that A star has a kernel.
Because A is a 2 by 3 matrix, there is some vector--
there's some three vector--
that gets taken into 0 because we're
mapping a three-dimensional space
into a two-dimensional space.
And we can see what that vector is.
It's just 1, minus 2, 1.
That is, if you double the middle column,
it's equal to the sum of the first and the third columns.
So, if you act with A star on this vector, you get 0.
That means that we can add to 0, 1, 0 any multiple--
let's multiply by x--
of that vector.
Now, we want to choose x so that each component of psi
is a positive number.
So psi being strictly positive requires first
that x be strictly positive because
the first and third components are going to be equal to x.
And the middle component is going
to be equal to 1 minus 2x.
And that sets an upper bound on x,
which says that x has to be between 0 and 1/2.
And that tells us what the allowed state price
vectors are.
There are an infinite number of them
because x can be anywhere in this range.
Does that always work?
No.
Suppose the state price-- suppose the market price
vector had been 1, 1.
Then there's arbitrage.
We saw that earlier.
There's stochastic dominance.
There's not going to be any solution for psi.
And suppose, on the other hand, S
is equal to 1, 3, which is the first column.
So then we might try to write down this equation.
We could say that psi-- we try the same trick as before.
Because 1, 3 is the first column of A transpose,
we could say psi has to 1, 0, 0 plus some multiple
of the kernel, plus some multiple of 1, minus 2, 0.
But there isn't any value of x for which that's going to work.
The first-- the second component that says we're
going to have minus 2x, that tells us that x
has to be strictly negative.
The third component is going to be equal to x.
That says x has to be strictly positive.
x cannot be both positive and negative at the same time.
Therefore, there's no solution for any value of x.