
PROFESSOR: So let's combine what we've seen.
Suppose we're given a payoff matrix
A. We're given market prices S. And we're given a target payoff
b.
What do we do?
Well, we want to find all state price factors that
satisfy our pricing equation.
Are there any solutions?
Is there a unique solution?
Or are there multiple solutions?
If there are no solutions to this equation,
then this market structure permits arbitrage.
If there's a unique solution, then it's a complete market.
And, if there are multiple solutions,
that means that it's an incomplete market.
What we do is we then price the asset
using all of the solutions.
That is the target payoff b.
We act on it with psi star.
If there's one solution for psi, then it's easy,
and we have a redundant asset.
Psi is greater than 0, and we compute
the price of the redundant asset as psi star b.
Otherwise, we find that there's a full range of allowed prices
that are all consistent with no arbitrage, provided that they
correspond to state price vectors that
have only positive values.

For example, consider our incomplete market.
So, if we have A is given by a stock and a bond,
the prices are given by 1, 2, and we're
asked for a specific target payoff,
say, 1 and 1/2, 1/2, 0, which is,
after all, the payoff of one of our original securities
from our first slide in this week's material,
then what can we say?
Well, we know that psi is given by 0, 1, 0
plus some multiple of the kernel.
And, to be consistent, A star psi equal to S,
we know that we need to have x is between 0 and 1/2.
So what's the price that we can associate with this call
option?
Well, to price the call option, we compute
psi star b for all allowed values of x.
That tells us that we get, by acting with psi star b
and applying linearity, it's equal to 1/2 plus x times 1/2.
And that means that we get 1/2 of 1 plus x.
Substituting in for the allowed values of x,
we find that the allowed values of this call
option in this incomplete market that is only a stock and a bond
are between 1/2 and 3/4.
So this is a new asset.
It's not a redundant asset.
There's no way to make it out of the existing securities.
Nevertheless, arbitrage pricing set
to bound based on the existing prices in the market
that it can't violate under penalty of arbitrage.