
PROFESSOR: So we've got two ways of computing prices.
One of them is in terms of market prices.
The other is in terms of state prices.
And I'd like to combine them by going back
to that diagram we drew earlier that
shows the algebraic notion of dual spaces
and take advantage of a couple of results from linear algebra.
So the idea is we want to relate the two.
And, when it comes time in practice,
you can use whichever one is convenient.
The market prices are convenient in that we know
what traded securities are.
And it's very easy to associate prices with securities.
And those prices might be observable on the market.
But what it doesn't tell us is necessarily
what the market structure is and what
could happen in different scenarios
so that we make sure that everything is consistent.
On the other hand, state prices are very easy.
There are no-- there are no extra pieces moving around.
Nothing else is hiding.
And the reason for that, the difference between the two,
is that we don't introduce extra states of the world that
aren't observed where we might introduce redundant securities.
So our initial assumption at the beginning,
when we started talking about linear algebra,
was that the states of the world were mutually exclusive,
and they're non-overlapping.
So that's really the reason why things
are simpler in state space, but you can use whatever is easier.
So I'd like to do some algebraic relationships
with a few pictures.
What we're going to come back to is the thing
about matrices where you can use whichever language is
more convenient.
We often find that, for doing pricing,
it's easier to compute in terms of observables in the market
prices.
For understanding market structure, restrictions,
and bounds, that's much more natural
in terms of state prices.
And, if we have a dual picture, it
means that we can freely move back and forth from one
to the other and get the advantages of both worlds.
So let's see how that looks.
So this duality picture means that we can do things
in two different ways.
And, although it's a little bit formal,
we can get our pricing relationship very,
very quickly by thinking about two different ways
of computing the same thing.
So, first of all, let's review what a dual space is.
A dual space is a set of functions on a vector space.
So let's begin with a vector space of portfolios.
And I can act on it with security prices.
And it's linear because the price of two portfolios
is the sum of the price of each of the portfolios.
So the way I act specifically is I turn S into a row vector.
I act on x.
And that gives me a scalar, which is the price.
But S acting on x1 plus x2 is S acting
on x1 plus S acting on x2.
Through our old friend linearity,
I get the same price.
Now, these are two different vector spaces, each of which
has the same dimension because I've
got one price per security.
But, although they're both Rn, they are different spaces.
And we saw they have different units.
One of them is in dollars.
The other is in shares.
You can't add them.
So, because we have two different Rn's, let's
give them names.
Let's call the lower one, our asset space, V. It's Rn.
But the upper space, the price space,
the set of market prices, we'll call V star for the dual space.
And it's also Rn.
So there are two different vector spaces
of the same dimension.
One of them acts on the other.
And this is called a dual space because it
has the same dimension.
Now, on the right-hand side of the diagram,
we have an analogous situation.
We have a set of payoffs.
These are a state space, which is S-dimensional.
Let's give that a name.
We'll call it W. And it's S-dimensional.
So, before, we could call that RS,
but let's call it W now because there's another RS.
There's another S dimensional vector space,
and that's W star.
It's a set of state prices, which
act on payoffs to give also values for portfolios
and, this time, portfolios that are defined not
by their security composition, but by their payoffs
in each state of the world.
And the way we do that calculation is we
take a vector in the space W star.
We turn it into a row vector by taking
its adjoint or its transpose.
And then we multiply it times the payoff vector b.
And these two things have to be the same.
So you can use whichever one you want,
but our pricing relationship tells us
how to connect the two.
So our pricing relationship, S equals A star psi,
we can think of in the following way.
We have our payoff matrix A, which
maps V to W, which I've written up here.
It takes portfolios into payoffs.
We have A star, which goes in the other direction,
it takes this dual space W star into V star.
It's a transpose matrix.
So the dimensions all work out.
It takes an S-dimensional space into an n-dimensional space.
And now we can compute our pricing
for a portfolio in terms of its payoffs in two different ways.
And we'd better get the same answer.
So let's see how that works in dual language.
To compute the price of a portfolio
on the left side of the diagram, I take S transpose times x.
On the right side of the diagram,
I would take psi star times b.
But suppose b is the image of A. Suppose b
is the payoff of a portfolio x.
Then I would take psi star acting on A times
x, which I can write out here.
So it must be the case that the row vector
S acting on x is the same thing as the row vector psi acting
on the product A times x.
Now, notice that psi star times A is just
the transpose of something.
And remember the rule for matrices.
The transpose of a product is a product
of the transposes in the reverse order.
And, also, the transpose of a transpose does nothing.
So we can write this as A star psi transpose.
If we apply that here, then we get this equation over here.
But then we recognize that A star psi
is exactly what we hoped to find in our pricing relationship.
And, in fact, we have this quantity, A star psi,
this quantity in parentheses.
When we take its transpose and we act on it a vector x,
we get the same thing as S, take its transpose, and act on x.
Because x is arbitrary in these two cases,
the only way this is going to hold
is if we can identify S with A star psi.
That's required for consistency.
We don't yet know whether they're unique,
but it is required.
This says that we can price a portfolio either in terms
of market prices or using the payoff matrix
in terms of state prices.

Now, there are some special relationships
among these operators between their images
and their null spaces.
And let me just give you an example.
But here's the summary of the result.
We can say that anything in the kernel
of A star acting on anything of the image of A gives 0.
That's this annihilator operator.
You could think of it as being like orthogonality.
Or we also have the additional relationship
that anything in the image of A star acting on anything
in the kernel of A gives 0.
So let's see how that works.
Suppose we have an arbitrage portfolio.
That is an arbitrage portfolio is a portfolio that
has zero payoff.
A acting on x is equal to 0.
It has zero payoff.
It's what we call an arbitrage portfolio.
So saying it's the kernel of A is just a fancy name
for saying that Ax equals 0.
Now, suppose we act on it with a price vector,
but that price vector is in the image of A star.
Now, to be in the image of A star, that
means that we found some vector over here in W star,
acted on it with A star, and got a security price.
So that might not be all possible security prices,
but it certainly is some of them.
So to say that S is in the image of A star
means that S is A star acting on some psi for some vector that's
there.
It means there's at least one.
There could be more than one.
So suppose we have these two conditions.
And now let's let S act on x.
What do we have?
So we have an element of the image
of A star acting on an element of the kernel of A.
So S star acting on x is going to be-- because it's
in the image, S star is A star psi is S star acting on x.
Take the transposes.
That's going to be psi star A acting on x.
This matrix multiplication is associative.
So let's regroup.
Let's do a A times x first and then act on it with psi star.
A times x is equal to 0 by this condition
because it's an arbitrage portfolio.
And I get 0.
So fancy notation that relates these different subspaces,
but it's really just encapsulating
the basic rules of arbitrage when
we have redundant securities.