
PROFESSOR: Here's a concrete example.
Suppose that we've got A is an incomplete--
represents the payoffs in an incomplete market.
I have a stock and I have a bond.
And the image of A is only two dimensional.
So image of A is two dimensional because I have two securities.
It's less than s, which is equal to 3.
So the rank of the matrix A is equal to 2.
And we know that.
We know the largest it could be is the smaller
the number of its rows and columns.
Because the two columns are independent,
it's exactly equal to 2.
So that image of A is a proper subspace of R3.
It's only two dimensional.
A star is the transpose, which we've seen before.
We know it has a kernel, that is A star takes a three
dimensional space into a two dimensional space.
Its kernel is the vector 1 minus 2, 1.
So suppose this-- this is a vector that lives in W star.
It lives in our dual space.
So if I come back here, it lives in this space over here.
And now if I return, and I imagine that I take psi
equals this vector, which is an element
of the kernel of A star.
This isn't a valid state price vector,
but it does live in the space W star.
So this is just some vector.
We noticed it does have a negative element here.
So this psi is an element of the kernel of A star.
And let's suppose it's going to act on the image of A.
So let's let b be the payoff of some portfolio.
So pick your favorite portfolio x,
act on it with the payoff matrix A, get its payoff b.
What is its state price?
Well, if we act with a state price that's
in the kernel of A star acting on b,
which is in the image of A, we can just do the computation.
Psi star acting on b is the same thing as star acting on A times
x.
We regroup, because it's associative.
That's the same thing as psi star A acting on x, which
is A star psi acting on x.
And that gives us 0.

Because psi was in the kernel of A star, A star acting on psi
is 0, therefore, this whole thing is 0.
And that tells us that the price of this portfolio--

or not the price, but if we act with psi star, which is not
a valid state price vector.
If we act with an element of the kernel of A star
with the image of A, we get 0.
So that helps us narrow things down.
So, let's bring it together.
We've got two different ways we can approach pricing.
And they're not just equivalent, they're called dual.
It's related to the dual prices, and they
have to give the same answers.
And you can use whichever one is more convenient.
State pricing says that we compute the price of our target
asset, the thing we might think about creating
a particular set of payoffs in different states of the world
by applying all of the allowed values of psi,
all of the valid state price vectors
which are consistent with our market structure.
The price is uniquely determined if b
is the payoff of a redundant asset,
is we know that redundant assets should have prices
that are uniquely determined.
In equations, we would say that the price of our asset
is given by--
see if I can get the pointer back--

there we go.
It's given by psi acting on b.
That is to say, the price we have
is psi star b where psi is consistent with the pricing
relationship, psi is in the dual space, and so all of its values
are positive.
So that's how we can do things in terms of state prices.
We can also do replication pricing, which
is what we started out with.
And we don't have any state prices involved at all.
You need to identify if it's a redundant asset, and if it is,
we associate the value of the payoff with the value
of the replicating portfolio.
That's required to avoid arbitrage.
Now, for non-redundant assets, we
can frame the allowed prices as a bound on the asset
prices that are subject to bounds
above and below by taking a look at possible replicating
portfolios.
In the dual side, we know what our view is about what
the allowed state prices are.
They have to be positive.
It's not quite as easy to find the price bounds
in our replicating pricing world,
but we do it by looking at the outside values where
we can replicate the portfolio.
We can find a minimum bound on the price
by defining S min to be the largest price that we can
observe for any portfolio that is strictly
less for each of its components than the target payoff b.
If that's the case, we know that this portfolio
has to be strictly less than--
or that the price of this portfolio
has to be strictly greater than the price of this portfolio.
And, similarly, we can look for a bound on the other side.
So if we think back to our first example of stochastic dominance
comparing a stock and bond, we think
about having a degree of freedom that lets
is very the portfolios so that we can move around and arrange
to where we can see the crossover points between where
we would exceed a payoff, or go below our lower payoff in one
of our components.
We can, with quite a bit more work,
we can identify bounds for the prices.
But either way in either picture,
when we have non-redundant assets,
their prices are not uniquely determined.
But there are constraints to arbitrage.
There are certain values that they're allowed to have
and some values that they can't have.