
PROFESSOR: The fundamental theorem of asset pricing
characterizes no arbitrage conditions in a marketplace.
It says that there is no arbitrage in a market if
and only if there exists a state price vector whose components
are strictly positive, and it's consistent with the market
prices, through our pricing relationship,
that we can get the security prices by A transpose acting
on the state price vector, all of whose components
are positive.
Now, it has an if and only if component.
And one direction is easy.
And that's the one we're going to do.
The other direction is hard.
It involves a theorem about separating hyperplanes.
And I'll leave it to you to take a look at the literature.
But, this one, we can use what we've done,
and it's very easy to show.
Let's see how it goes.
We have type I and type II arbitrage,
and we'd like to exclude them both.
So, first, let's look at the absence of type I arbitrage.
Suppose that I've got a portfolio with a payoff that's
greater than 0.
Remember what we mean here.
We mean that it has to have no non-negative payoffs,
and at least one of the components of b
has to be positive.
So our statement of no type I arbitrage
is that, if we have a positive payoff,
if we have this condition, then the price of this portfolio
must be strictly positive.
It can't be 0.
It can't be negative.
We can't get something for nothing.
So how do we show this?
Well, let's compute the price.
S star x is the price.
That's equal, via our pricing relationship,
to psi star A, acting on the portfolio x.
We can use associativity of our matrices.
That's the same as psi star acting on A times x.
But that Ax is the payoff of our portfolio b.
And that psi star b, because psi has only positive components,
and b has at least one positive component
and no negative components, this is
going to be the sum of positive numbers or 0.
And, therefore, it has to be greater than 0.
Done, one line.
Absence of type II arbitrage, suppose that we
have an arbitrage portfolio.
That is, suppose I have a portfolio that's non-zero.
So I do have securities in my portfolio.
But they're combined in such a way that the payoff is 0.
One way we do that is by having a security
held long and other securities that replicate it held short.
We saw that in the example of replicating
an option in terms of other securities in the portfolio.
So, if I have a non-trivial portfolio that has a zero
payoff--
that happens when we have a redundant asset
in our marketplace-- then the absence of type
II arbitrage says, if you've got an arbitrage portfolio,
then its price must be 0.
In other words, the value of redundant assets
needs to be uniquely determined by independent assets
in the marketplace.
So that's what we require.
How do we show it?
Let's compute the price.
S star x, the value of the arbitrage portfolio,
is going to be given by psi star A acting on x,
but A times x is 0.
And, therefore, it's equal to 0.
So that's shown one direction of the fundamental theorem
of asset pricing and how we can be sure
that we have consistent prices in the marketplace that don't
allow arbitrage, even when markets are incomplete
or when there are redundant securities.