
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to find certainty equivalent
for an investor with a given utility function,
and for a given lottery or for a given investment opportunity.
You are given the following lottery.
With probably 0.1, the payoff is $80,000.
With probability 0.3, the payoff is $20,000.
And with probably 0.6, the payoff is $5,000.
If the investor has utility function u of x equal to x,
what is the riskless payoff that would
make her different between choosing
this particular lottery and the riskless payoff?
Then part b of this question gives you
an investor with a different utility function, which
is u of x equals x raised to the power of 1 over 2,
and asks you the same question.
And part c of this question gives you yet another investor
with utility function u of x equals to x raised
to the power of 1 over 3.
In this question, we ask to find what in economics we referred
to as a certainty equivalent.
Let me define what it is.
Certainty equivalent is the smallest riskless payoff amount
that makes an investor indifferent between taking
a risky lottery or accepting this certain amount.
Mathematically, our utility from certainty equivalent
or from this guaranteed riskless payoff
should equal to the expected utility
that we'll get from engaging into this risky lottery
or risky investment.
To find certainty equivalent for an investor
with a given utility function in a given lottery,
we need to do the following two steps.
Step number 1, find expected utility of investor
from this given lottery.
And step 2, find certainty equivalent
by inverting the utility function.
Let's find certainty equivalent for investor
in part a, investor with a linear utility function.
So step 1 is to find expected utility that this investor will
get from this lottery.
We have already learned how to do this in question number 1
of this recitation.
So the expected utility of this investor equals to 0.1 times
the utility of the first payoff, which
was $80,000, plus the probability of the second state
times the utility that we get of the payoff in the second state,
that's $20,000, plus the third probability or the probability
of the third state, multiplied by the utility of the payoff
that we get in this third state.
Since the utility function is linear,
this just becomes 0.1 multiplied by 80,000
plus 0.3 multiplied by 20,000, plus 0.6 multiplied by 5,000.
Computing this gives us the expected utility of 17,000.
So this is the expected utility of this investor
from this given lottery.
Now in step 2, we can find certainty equivalent.
The utility of the certainty equivalent
would equal to $17,000.
In the case of this investor, she
has a linear utility function.
So u of CE, which is equal to CE.
And so therefore, certainty equivalent for this investor
is just 17,000.
So therefore, this investor is indifferent between just
taking guaranteed $17,000, this is our certainty equivalent,
or playing this lottery.