
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
learn how to find the risk premium for an investor
for whom we know their utility function
and for a given investment opportunity
or for a given lottery.
We will consider the following two investors, A and B,
with the following utility functions.
You can verify that these utility functions are concave
and both of these investors are risk averse.
There is an investment opportunity.
That's with probability 0.5 with 25% return, positive 25%,
and with the remaining probability
of 0.5 returns, negative 25%.

We will start by assuming that both of these investors have
initial wealth of $1.00.
And first, we'll compute their coefficients of relative risk
aversion, evaluate it at the initial wealth.
Two, for both of these investors,
we'll compute the risk premium associated
with the above investment opportunity.
Let's start by computing the coefficient of relative risk
aversion for both of these investors.
By definition, relative risk aversion
of a given investor with wealth W
is given by the following expression.
So it's negative wealth multiplied
by the second derivative of the utility function.
Evaluate it at W. Divide it by the first derivative
of the utility function.
Evaluate it, W.
Let's start with the first the investor.
Her utility function is this.
It's X raised to the power 1 over 3.
And what we need to do, we need to compute
the first and the second derivative of this utility
function.
So that we can compute the coefficient,
the relative risk aversion.
So the first derivative of this utility function
is given by the first part of this expression,
and then the second derivative we can compute
is given by the second part.
Plugging both of these expressions
into the definition of relative risk aversion
gives us the following, which, if we compute,
just gives us 2/3.

Therefore, the coefficient of relative risk aversion
of investor A is just 2/3.

Now, let's do the same for investor B.
This is investors B utility function,
so the first step is, again, to compute
the first and second derivative of the utility function.
And these are the expressions for the first
and the second derivative.
Plugging both of these into the definition
gives us the following expression.
If we compute this, we would get 1/3 multiplied by W.
And since the question asks us to evaluate the coefficient,
the relative risk aversion for both of these investors
at the points of the initial wealth,
we need to plug-in W into this equation for investor B.
So given that her wealth is $1.00,
this gives us the coefficient of relative risk aversion for this
investor of just 1/3.
So to summarize so far, investor A
has a higher relative risk aversion coefficient,
and it equals to 2/3.
And investor B has a lower relative risk aversion
coefficient, and it equals to 1/3.
Both of which are evaluated at the initial wealth of $1.00.
