
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
look at diversification benefits of holding
a portfolio with many stocks.
Let's assume that the average stock has a volatility of 35%.
So that's a standard deviation.
Let's also assume that the average correlation
between pairs of stocks is 25%.
And let's compute the following.
Let's compute the volatility of equally weighted portfolio that
has just one stock, 20 stocks, and 500 stocks.
Let's first derive the variance of Portfolio P, equally
weighted portfolio.
So this is the sum of all possible combinations
of covariance between stock i and j with the weights
that we put into stock i and j.
So if we think of this variance-covariance metrics
where we have on the diagonal, the variance
of individual stocks and off diagonal elements
of the pair-wise covariances, then this
is just simply the weighted average
of all of these items in this matrix.
Again with the weights that we put in each of these individual
stocks, these w's.
Since we have an equally weighted portfolio
this w's are, each of them, just 1 over n.
And so this product is just 1 over n squared.
So this variance becomes the sum of 1
over n squared multiplied by the pair-wise covariance
between stock i and stock j.
Now I'm going to break down this sum into the following two
sums.
One is the sum of this variance.
So visually if you think of this term, what
I'll try to do visually here is that I
will separate the variance, what I have here
on the main diagonal, from the covariances.
So I'm taking the variance.
And there are n of them.
And so 1 over n squared times all
of the sum of these variances plus 1 over n squared,
the remaining sum of all possible covariances here.
So notice that in this covariance term,
I'm saying that this is the first summation from i to n
and then the second summation from j to n.
But I'm saying that j should not equal to i because these
are the ones that this would be the variance terms that I
separated into this first sum.
So now what I'm going to do further
is that I will factor out 1 over n first.
And then what is going to be remaining
here is 1 over n times the sum of the variances here
of all stocks from 1 to n.
And so this term right here in parentheses
is just the average variance.
We can think of it this way.
And we know because this equation
gives us what is the average volatility of stock
so we would know what is the average variance.
So similarly, here I will try to isolate the average covariance
in the second term.
So the average covariance is just
the sum of all of the covariance divided
by the number of the covariance terms that we have.
What is the number of this covariance terms here?
Well, again, so referring back to these matrix,
you can think of it as just the number of off diagonal elements
here.
And so if the total number of elements in this matrix
is just n squared, the number of diagonal elements
is n squared minus n.
And so therefore I'm isolating here 1
divided by n squared minus n.
So this is the number, again, of the covariance terms multiplied
by the sum of all of these covariance terms.
And that's what's remaining.
So it's n squared that we had before.
And I'm now multiplying here by n squared minus n
to offset this additional division
that I put here so that this represents
the average covariance.
Now so what we have is that the variance of this portfolio,
equally weighted portfolio, equals to one over n multiplied
by the average variance, plus this term which is
you can see that n squared is going to cancel out.
So it's 1 minus 1 over n.
So there's this term.
And then what I have in parentheses here
is just the average covariance.
And so therefore we have 1 over n times average variance
plus 1 minus 1 over n times the average covariance.
And again, we know both the average volatility here
there is a variance and the average correlation.
So we can compute the average covariance between the pairs
of stocks here.
Now once we know this expression,
now we can plug in n equals to 1, n equals to 20,
and n equals to 500, and to compute the variance
of these portfolios.
So let's work with this expression
to compute the volatility of equally weighted portfolios
of 1, 20 and 500 stocks.
So first let me compute the average variance and average
covariance from the information that we're given here.
So the average variance would be just
the average standard deviation that we're given, 35% squared.
And the average covariance would be the average correlation
which were given again, 25%, multiplied
by two standard deviations of the average standard deviations
of stock.
So 0.35 times 0.35.
And now so we know the average variance
and we know the average covariance, so we can compute--
we just simply can plug in n's for 1, 20 and 500
and compute the variances and standard deviations
of this respective portfolios.
When n equals to 1, this is the variance.
And the standard deviation of this portfolio would be 35%.
And it does make sense.
So if you look back at this equation, so if n equals to 1,
this term equals to 0 so this is not relevant.
And so this equals to 1.
And so this is just the average variance.
And so therefore, if we have just Portfolio 1 stock,
its standard deviation is going to be
equal to the average standard deviation of stock here, 35%.
When we have 20 stocks, this is the variance
that we can compute by plugging 20 in here.
And the standard deviation of this portfolio would be 18.77%.
When we have 500 stocks, the standard deviation
of this portfolio would be 17.55%.
So these are the volatilities of these three portfolios.
Now let's look at these numbers.
By combining as few as 20 stocks into a portfolio, equally
weighted portfolio, we were able to reduce the volatility almost
twice from 35% to 18.77%.
So this is a dramatic reduction in volatility,
and we get it by just combining as few as 20 stocks
in our portfolio.
Once we keep adding more stocks, we still
get the reciprocation benefits.
But they're not seemingly as large
as they're here in the very beginning
where we're combining just few stocks.
You can look at this from when we get from 20 to 500.
The reduction in volatility is just from 18.77% to 17.85%.
So this is again-- so there is a reduction here but seemingly
not as large as it is here originally.
And so therefore, the main lesson here
is that we get a lot of diversification benefits
by combining just a few stocks in our portfolio given
that the average correlation between returns
is not that large.
And so in this particular case, if it's 25%,
most of this reduction is driven by the fact
that we're combining a few stocks
and the average correlation between these stocks
is just 25%.
And so, again, as we keep adding,
we don't get as much as we get initially
when we adding a few stocks.
Let's see what happens when we're
combining more and more stocks in our portfolio,
in other words, when n goes to infinity.
When n goes to infinity, the variance of this portfolio
is going to become equal to average covariance.
We could see it from this expression.
1 over n is going to go to 0 when n goes to infinity.
1 minus 1 over n is going to go to 1.
And so therefore, this expression
is just going to become average covariance.
And therefore the standard deviation
of the portfolio that has infinitely many stocks
would be the square root of the average covariance, which
would be 17.5%.
so as we're combining infinitely many stocks,
the absolute minimum that volatility of our portfolio
that we can achieve in this particular economy is 17.5%.