
PROFESSOR: The next question asks
us to find the standard deviation of this portfolio P.
So recall that this portfolio P put 60% into A and 40% into B.
So let's write down the expression for the variance
of a portfolio of two stocks.
So the variance of this portfolio, RP
equals to the weight that we put in the first stock,
stock A, squared, times the variance
of the returns of stock A, plus weights
that we put into stock B squared times the variance of stock B
plus 2 times weights that we put into A and B
times the covariance of the returns between stocks A and B.
In this question, we're given the correlation of returns
between A and B. So what I will do
is, I will expand this equation, where I will express covariance
of the function of standard deviations of returns of stocks
A and B and their correlation.
So the first two terms remain the same.
The third term becomes 2 times the weights
times the standard deviation of the returns on A times
the standard deviation of the returns on B,
times the correlation of the returns between the two stocks.
So this is just the definition of the covariance.
Now we're ready to plug in all the numbers.
So the weights are 60% and 40%, so it's
0.6 squared, 0.4 squared, multiplied
by the variance of the returns of stock A, which
is standard deviation 0.2, 20%.
Then it means that the variance is 20%, or 0.2 squared.
0.25 for stock B, so 0.25 squared--
this is the variance of stock B.
And this third term is the covariance
of the correlation term.
So it's 2 times the weights times two standard deviations,
so 0.2 and 0.25, times the correlation
of the returns between stocks A and B. So this is 0.2.
So when you compute this, we get 0.0292.
And so this is the variance of the portfolio
P. Since the question asks us to find the standard deviation--
so what we do is that we're taking
the square root of this variance, and we get 17.1%.
So this is the standard deviation
of the returns of the portfolio P, which invests 60% into stock
A and 40% into stock B.
