
PROFESSOR: Let's now assume that both of these investors
got richer.
Their wealth was $1.
Right now their wealth is $5.
We will repeat the same calculations.
So we'll compute the coefficients of relative risk
aversion for both of these investors given
their new wealth.
And we will compute the risk premium associated
with this risky investment opportunity
that we are considering in this question.

Recall that the relative risk aversion that we can computed
for investor A was just 2/3.

Notice something very important.
This coefficient, the relative risk aversion for this investor
does not depend on her wealth.
It's 2/3 regardless of how rich this investor is.

This is what we call constant relative risk aversion.

The risk aversion of this investor
does not depend on how wealthy she is.

For Investor B, however, the relative risk aversion
does depend on the wealth of this investor.
Recall that the relative risk aversion of this investor
was 1 over 3 multiplied by wealth w.
So when wealth is $5, the relative risk aversion
of this investor is 5/3.

So generally for this investor, risk aversion
increases as this investor gets richer.
Now let's compute the risk premium for investor
A. First we're computing the expected utility this investor
gets from this lottery.
It's the same expression as we had before,
but right now instead of $1, we have $5.
This is our current wealth.
Computing this gives us the expected utility of 1.698.
And now we can compute the risk premium
by solving the following equation.

So recall that the utility function of this investor
is cube root.
And the wealth right now is $5.
Solving this equation for pi gives us 2.12%,
this is exactly the same 2.12% as we had before.
So now, given the higher wealth of these investors, so $5,
this investor has still required risk premium of 2.12%.
And in fact, this risk premium would not
depend on the level of wealth of this investor.
Just because the risk aversion of these investors
does not depend on her wealth.

Now for Investor B, we have the same expression.

Using the utility function of this investor,
we can compute that the expected utility from this lottery
is 0.794.
To compute the risk premium, we're solving this equation.
We know the utility function.
We know w, which is $5.
Plugging this in gives us this equation,
which we need to solve for pi.
Solving this equation for pi gives us 5.06%.
And so given the wealth of $5, this investor right now
has a risk premium of 5.06%.
Let's summarize.
Investor A has a constant relative risk aversion.
Regardless of whether her wealth is $1 of $5,
the coefficient of relative risk aversion of this investor
is just 2/3.
Regardless of how rich this investor is,
the risk premium associated with this particular investment
opportunity is 2.12%.
For any other level of wealth, it will always stay constant
at the same exact level.
Risk premium, of course, would differ
if we give this investor a different investment
opportunity.
That investment opportunity may have a different risk premium.
But for this particular investment,
for any level of wealth, risk premium stays constant.
But investor B, the richer this investor becomes,
the more risk averse she gets, is
indicated by increasing relative risk aversion coefficient.
When her wealth is $5, the coefficient
of relative risk aversion is 5/3,
which is higher than that of investor A
at that level of risk.
And so therefore when you compare
risk premium for investor A and B,
when they both have wealth of $5,
the risk premium required by investor B
is higher than that of investor A.
Finally, as Investor B becomes richer,
her relative risk aversion increases and so does
the risk premium she requires from investing
into this lottery.
You could compare the first case when she's--
when her wealth is $1 and her risk premium
is 1.04% to the case when her wealth is $5 and the risk
premium is 5.06%.
This risk premium will continue rising
as this investor gets richer.