
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will
work with historical returns, and we will learn how
to compute measure statistics--
means, standard deviations, and correlations.
We will work with the following three exchange-traded funds--
Vanguard Total Stock Market ETF, iShares 20+ Year Treasury Bond
ETF, and Vanguard FTSE Emerging Markets ETF.
Our sample will consist of monthly returns
and will cover the last decade, January 2010
through December 2019.
Before we go ahead and compute statistics,
let me first tell you a few interesting facts
about these exchange-traded funds.

This is an example of a fact sheet for Vanguard Total Stock
Market ETF.
It shows a few interesting statistics.
First, it shows the number of stocks currently traded
on the US exchanges.
This number is 3,535 stocks.
An interesting fact is that the number of publicly traded firms
in the United States has been declining over the past decade.
Second, we can see sector breakdown of the US economy.
Technology comprises a quarter of all publicly traded stocks
in the US.
Financial is in the second place,
health care in the third.
And, finally, here we can see the largest stocks
in the United States.
As of March 31, 2020, Microsoft was first, Apple second.
Amazon, Alphabet, and Facebook are the third, fourth,
and fifth.
Second ETF is a 20-plus year treasury bond ETF.
This ETF invests in long treasury bonds.
You can see that all of the top holdings
consist of treasury bond.
These are the bonds that at the time of issuance
have 30 years until maturity.
If you look at the current portfolio of holdings
as of July 9, 2020, these are the different maturities
on these long bonds that comprise
the portfolio of this ETF.
And, indeed, you can see that all of them
have more than 20 years to maturity.
Finally, the last ETF is the emerging markets ETF.
Here some of the interesting statistics
come from composition of countries in this ETF.
So you can see that China has almost 50%
of the entire holdings of this ETF,
followed by Taiwan, India, Brazil, South Africa, Russia,
and so forth.
You can see that sectoral breakdown in emerging markets
is a little different compared to the United States.
The first sector that has more than quarter of all holdings
is financials, followed by technology, consumer services,
industrials, and consumer goods.
Now that we have some color on these ETFs,
let's start working with data and compute basic statistics.
This is the data file that gives us monthly returns,
so it starts from January 2010 and goes all the way
to December 2019.
The numbers in this file are percentage returns.
For example, in January 2010, VTI had a negative 3.5% return.
And so all of these numbers that are given here
are just percentages.
Let's start with sample mean.
Here I provide formulas so that we can easily
see what is it that we're trying to compute.
I will try to use directly the formulas and compute by hand
these statistics, and then I will show you
shortcuts and some of the formulas in Excel
that allow to compute some of these basic statistics
but more easily.
So let's start with the sample mean.
Sample mean, by definition, is just
the sum of all returns divided by the number of these returns.
So I'll first compute it by hand.
So I will say sample mean here, and I will first
add up all of the returns, for example, for VTI.
So this is the sum of all the returns.
And then I will divide it by the number of observations
that we have here.
So the number of observations we have is we
have 10 years and monthly returns, so it's 120.
So if we divide this by 120, this
will be the mean return that we had on VTI during the sample
period.
Now, another way to compute sample mean
is just to use average function in Excel.
So if we do this, we'd get exactly the same answer.
So we can see that the return is exactly the same.
So from now on, I will just use the average function
to compute returns.
So I'll say average here, and I will extend this
to the other two ETFs.

So here we can see the following.
The average monthly return on the US entire stock
market on this ETF is 1.12% per month during this time period.
The long bond, the TLT ETF, the average return
was 0.65%, which is perhaps higher
than you would have thought because this
is a fixed-income instrument issued by the government.
And, finally, emerging markets produced 0.4% monthly return,
which is, during this sample period,
significantly below the monthly return that was produced
by the US stock market.

Now, next, let's compute sample variance and then
standard deviation.
So, first, this is just a reminder
of the formula for the sample variance.
And I will compute it first by just using this formula
directly just to show you how to do this by hand in Excel.
So you can see that we first have
to take the difference between the returns
and the sample mean, square it for every month,
then add it all up, and then divide it by t minus 1.
So what I will do here--
I'll just create another column for now.
And what I will do is that I will compute this difference
and square them.
So I'll take this, minus the sample
mean that I just computed, and I will square it.

I will extend this array.
Now I will add up these numbers that I just computed,
the squared differences.
And then I will divide this number by 119
because, remember, we have 120 observations here.
So 120 minus 1 is 119.
119, by the way.
So we are subtracting 1 because we already
estimated one statistic, which is the sample mean,
so we are losing one degree of freedom.
And so this would be the sample variance of returns here.
If I wanted to take the standard deviation,
I will take the square root of this.
So I will say square root of this number.
And this will be the sample standard deviation of returns.
Now, of course, there is a simpler way
of doing this in Excel.
So there is a function that does it for us.
So it's called STDEV, that's standard deviation,
dot S. So this is the sample one that
actually divides by t minus 1.
So if I do this and if I take all of the returns here,
next let's compute sample variance.
I will create some workspace for me here.
And the first thing that I would like to do
is I would like to use directly the formula
to compute the sample variance.
So I'll take the differences between monthly returns
and the estimated sample mean.
I will square them.
I will add them up, and then I will divide it by t minus 1.
So I will do it here.
So I'll take the difference between a return
in the given month minus the estimated sample mean.

And I will square this difference.

Now I will add up and sum up all of the squared differences.

And then I will divide this number by t minus 1.
So t in our case is 120.
Minus 1 is 119.
We are, by the way, dividing it by t minus 1
because we already used this data to estimate sample mean.
So we're losing one degree of freedom
when we're estimating the second moment of the variance here.
And so this number right now, so 13.873,
this is sample variance.
For us to get sample standard deviation,
I'm just taking the square root of this variance.
And this is the number right now.
Now, there is, of course, much easier way in Excel
to do the same calculation.
So all I have to do is that I can use STDEV.S function.
So this is the function that computes sample standard
deviation.
So if I do this and I just simply take
the old area of returns, I hit Enter,
I get exactly the same number.
So the standard deviation of returns on VTI is 3.725%.
And so now I'll just delete this here.
I showed you how to compute this.
Now we can just directly use this function
for the rest of the ETFs.
So I will say this is sample standard deviation.

And since we computed this for VTI,
we can extend this to compute it for the other two ETFs.
So, very interestingly, you can see that the sample standard
deviation for the long bond ETF is
almost the same as for the stock market in the United States.
So the returns on long bond are quite volatile.
And, again, you can also see that the standard deviation
on the returns on the emerging market
is actually quite a bit higher than the standard deviation
of returns in the United States.
Now, finally, let's compute covariance.
I'll first compute, again, covariance by hand
and then correlation by using the formulas here,
and I will do it for VTI and TLT.
So, first, I'll compute the differences
between monthly returns and estimated means on the two
ETFs.
I will multiply them, and then I will add them up.
So I will create just a little bit more,
again, workspace for me here.
So the first thing I will compute is these differences
and then multiply them.
So this is monthly return minus the estimated mean multiplied
by the same for the second ETF.

So this is computing the same product for every month.

Now I will add up this sum, so I will sum them all up.

And then I'll also divide it by t minus 1
or by 119 in our case.
And so now this number here is the covariance, or the sample
covariance between the total stock market in the US
and the returns in the long bond ETF.
You can see that this number is negative,
which means that there is negative covariance
and, hence, will be negative correlation
between the returns on these two financial instruments.
Now that we know the covariance, let us compute correlation.
So correlation will be just the covariance,
which we'll have to divide by the two standard deviations,
which were already computed.
So we will take this number, and we will divide it
by the standard deviation of the first ETF and by the second--
by the standard deviation of the second ETF.
And, also, this is the correlation.
So you could see that correlation
is almost negative 50%.
Now, of course, there has to be another way of computing
this correlation, and we can simply
just use the CORREL function in Excel,
which does this job for us.
So if we do this first array--
so it requires two inputs, so the first array
and the second array.
So this is the first one, and now this is the second.
And when we hit Enter, we're going
to get exactly the same number.
The point of this exercise is to show you
that we can compute all of these statistics
by hand because we understand what the statistics are.
But then we can use built-in functions
to compute these correlations more automatically.
So this is the correlation between VTI
and TLT. I will delete this column for now because we don't
need it anymore, and I'll just use this function
to compute these correlations.
So this is the correlation between VTI and TLT.
The other correlation here-- we'll
compute the correlation between TLT and the emerging market
ETF, so this one.

And this is the secondary.
So this would be the correlation between TLT and VWO.

And the third correlation here would
be the correlation between VTI, so between the US stock market,
and the emerging stock market.
So CORREL and then I'm putting the first array
in and then the second array.
And this is the result.
So it paints us a very interesting picture.
So first is that there is very negative
and strong correlation, at least historical correlation,
between the returns on the total stock market in the US
and on the long bond.
Second, there is also low correlation, although a little
less between the returns on the bond ETF and the emerging
markets.
And the third fact and perhaps very interesting fact,
because you would have thought that maybe the returns
on the US stock market and emerging markets
are not very well correlated, what these numbers shows here
is that the correlation between the two is almost 75%,
which is a very significant correlation.
Means that US stock market, at least historical, again,
and emerging stock markets correlates very highly
with one another.
If you are a US investor and you're
looking to diversify your current portfolio,
let's imagine that you 100% invested in the US stock
market, and you would like to diversify your portfolio.
You might think that investing in the emerging stock market
is a good idea because it provides large diversification
benefits.
And it does because correlation is not exactly one.
However, there is still a high degree
of correlation between the US stock market and the emerging
stock markets.
Again, it was so, at least historically.
And if you really want to diversify,
you're much better off investing in the long-term bonds
or long-term ETFs, as indicated by these numbers
here in this TLT ETF, because of this low negative correlation
between the returns on the US stock market and on the US
long-term bonds.
