
Let's find a risk premium for these investors.
By definition, the risk premium pi is the fraction of wealth
that an investor is willing to lose
that makes her indifferent between a risky zero
expected return investment x and the sure loss pi.
Mathematically, we can write it as follows.
Recall that the investment opportunity that we have
in this question is as follows.
So it said the positive 25% or negative 25%
would equal probabilities 1/2.
So notice that this investment opportunity's zero
expected return investment.

Let's first compute the expected utility
from investing into this project investment opportunity.
So by definition it's 1/2 times utility in the upstate.
So this is $1 multiplied by positive 25% return
plus another 1/2 multiplied by the utility of $1
and multiplied by 1 minus 25%.
So this is our loss state.

Given that the first investor has cube root utility function,
for her this expected utility becomes as such.
1/2 multiplied by 1.25 raised to the power of 1 over 3
plus 1/2 multiplied by 0.75 raised the same power
of 1 over 3.
And so this gives us 0.993.
Now knowing this expected utility,
we can compute the risk premium for this investor
from this equation.
So again, the utility function is cube root and the wealth
of this investor W is $1.
So this gives us this equation.
0.993 equals to 1 minus pi raised
to the power of 1 over 3.
All we need to do is to solve this equation for pi.
And this gives us 2.12%.
So therefore the risk premium required by this investor
for this investment opportunity is 2.12%.
In other words, this investor is indifferent between losing
for sure 2.12% of her initial wealth of $1
and engaging in this 0% expected return investment
opportunity that has a certain level of risk.
Now let's compute risk premium for investor
B. We started with the same exact equation.
The only difference right now is, of course,
the utility function.
So for this investor, the expected utility
from this investment opportunity is 1/2 multiplied by 1 minus e
raised to the power negative 1.25 divided
by 3 plus 1/2 multiplied by 1 minus e
raised to the power of negative 0.75 divided by 3.
So this equals to 0.281.
Now again, knowing this expected utility,
we can find the risk premium for this investor.
Again, we know the utility function and the initial wealth
is $1.
So therefore this gives us the following expression.
All we need to do is to solve this expression for pi.
Doing this gives us 1.04%.
So therefore, this is the risk premium
required by this investor for this given lottery.
So in other words, this investor is
willing to lose for sure 1.04% of the initial wealth
$1, indifferent between that and engaging
in this 0% expected return risky investment opportunity.
Let's summarize.
When both investors A and B have initial wealth of $1,
investor A has a higher coefficient
of relative risk aversion compared to investor B.
Risk premium required by investor A
to invest into this lottery is also higher
compared to that of investor B.
So therefore, both relative risk aversion coefficient
and the risk premium line up in such a way
that if the coefficient of the relative risk aversion for one
investor is higher than that for another one,
the risk premium required for investing into this given
investment opportunity would also be higher
for the investor, would be higher coefficient
of relative risk aversion.
