
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider multiple situations in the market
to determine whether they are consistent with the capital
asset pricing model or not.
Let's start with situation number one.
We have two stocks, A and B.
The expected return on stock A is 25%,
and the expected return on stock B is 15%.
The beta of stock A is 0.8, and the beta of stock B is 1.2.
Is this situation consistent with the capital asset pricing
model?
I recommend you to pause this video
and to try to answer this question yourself first.
This situation is not consistent with the Capital Asset Pricing
Model.
We can see from the CAPM equation
that, the higher is the beta, the higher
should be the expected return.
In this situation, however, we have stock B that has a higher
beta, but it has a lower expected return,
15% versus 25% for stock A. Therefore,
such a situation cannot happen in the marketplace.
Situation number two, stock A has
expected return 25% and a standard deviation of 30%.
And the market portfolio has expected return of 15%
and the standard deviation of 30%.
Is this situation consistent with the capital asset pricing
model?

This situation is not consistent with the CAPM.
As shown on this graph, stock A lies
outside of the capital market line
and outside of the efficient frontier.
Therefore, the market portfolio must be inefficient.
Situation number three, there are three assets--
a risk-free asset with a return of 10%,
the market portfolio with expected return of 18%
and standard deviation of 24%, and stock A
with expected return of 16% and standard deviation of 12%.
Is this situation consistent with the capital asset pricing
model?
This situation is not consistent with the CAPM.
As shown on this graph, stock A lies
outside of the capital market line
and outside of the efficient frontier.
The Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio
is 0.33 while the Sharpe ratio of stock A is 0.5.
This means that the market portfolio is not efficient,
which contradicts the capital asset pricing model.
Situation number four, there are three assets--
a risk-free asset with a return of 5% and beta of 0,
the market portfolio with expected return of 15%
and beta of 1, and stock A with expected return of 20% and beta
of 1.5.
Is this situation consistent with the capital asset pricing
model?

This situation is consistent with the CAPM.
We can use the provided information
to compute expected return on stock A. According to the CAPM,
it equals risk-free rate, which is 5%,
plus beta multiplied by the market risk premium.
The beta of stock A is 1.5, and the market risk premium
is the difference between the expected return
on the market, which is 15%, and the risk-free rate,
which is 5%.
This gives us the expected return
on stock A, which equals 20%.
This return is consistent with the provided information.
Visually, you can see that stock A
lies on the security market line, which
is required by the CAPM.

Let's consider situation number five.
This will be our last example.
Suppose there are two funds.
First is the real estate fund with expected return of 30%
and standard deviation of 35%.
And the second one is private equity fund
with the expected return of 40% and standard deviation of 25%.
Is this situation consistent with the CAPM?

This situation is consistent with the CAPM.
Recall that investors get compensated
only for systematic risk, which is measured by beta,
rather than for the total risk, which
is measured by the standard deviation of returns.
The total risk contains idiosyncratic risk
for which investors do not get extra compensation because they
can diversify this risk away.
Therefore, the fact that the real estate fund
offers low expected return and has higher standard deviation
does not mean that CAPM is violated
or that there is no place for such asset in the market.
