
PROFESSOR: Suppose that an endowment fund is currently
investing 20% of its portfolio in the risk-free asset,
and the remaining 80% is invested in the private equity
fund called Eternal Growth.
The endowment fund analyzed holdings of Eternal Growth's
portfolio and found that its expected returns
over the next year will be 10%, and standard deviation
will be 25%.
Research conducted by the endowment fund
indicates that the market portfolio
will have expected return of 10% and standard deviation of 20%
during the next year.
The correlation of returns between Eternal Growth's
portfolio and the market portfolio is 0.8.
Suppose the risk-free asset will yield
5% return over the next year.
We will answer the following questions.
Compute CAPM beta of Eternal Growth's portfolio.
Compute CAPM beta and alpha of the endowment fund's portfolio.
Suppose that you were retained as an advisor
to the endowment fund.
Would you recommend divesting part
of the holdings in Eternal Growth
and reallocating them to the market portfolio?
Let's start with the first question.
Recall that CAPM beta for portfolio P
is the correlation of returns on this portfolio with the market
multiplied by the standard deviation of this portfolio
returns divided by the standard deviation of the returns
on the market portfolio.
In our case, the correlation of returns between Eternal Growth
and the market is 0.8.
The standard deviation of returns of Eternal Growth
portfolio is 25%.
And the standard deviation of returns of the market portfolio
is 20%.
Putting this all together, the CAPM beta of Eternal Growth
portfolio is 1.
Next, let's find CAPM beta and alpha of the endowment fund.
Let's start with beta.
Recall that the endowment fund is invested
20% into the risk-free asset and 80%
into the Eternal Growth fund.
Therefore, CAPM beta of the endowment fund
would be the weighted average of CAPM
betas of the risk-free asset and of the Eternal Growth.
The beta of the risk-free asset is 0,
and the beta of the Eternal Growth fund,
which we found in the previous question, is 1.
Therefore, the beta of the endowment fund is 0.8.
In order to find CAPM alpha, let's first compute
the expected return on this endowment fund given
its portfolio allocation.
Recall that it's 20% risk-free asset and 80% the Eternal
Growth fund.
Therefore, the expected return on the endowment fund
is 20% times the return on the risk-free asset
plus 80% times the expected return on the Eternal Growth
fund.
This is 20% times 5% plus 80% times 10%.
This gives us 9%.
We can compute CAPM alpha as the difference between the expected
return that the endowment fund expects to generate,
which we just computed-- it is 9%--
and the expected return under the capital asset pricing model
given its systematic risk exposure.
Given the beta of 0.8, the expected return
on the endowment fund under the capital asset pricing model
is the risk-free rate plus beta multiplied by the market risk
premium.
Recall that the risk-free rate is 5%,
and the expected return on the market portfolio is 10%.
Therefore, under the CAPM, the expected return
on the endowment fund should be 9%.
Putting this all together, we get
that the CAPM alpha of this endowment fund is 0%.

Finally, let's answer the last question.
You are an advisor to this endowment fund.
Do you recommend to partially reallocate assets
from Eternal Growth fund to the market portfolio?
The answer is yes, you should recommend such reallocation.
The easiest way to see it is to compare the Sharpe ratio
on the endowment fund with the Sharpe ratio
on the market portfolio.
You can see that the Sharpe ratio of the endowment fund
is 0.2.
It is computed as the expected return on the endowment fund,
9%, minus the risk-free rate, 5%,
divided by the standard deviation of this endowment
fund, 20%.
The standard deviation is computed
by multiplying 80%, which is the allocation to the Eternal
Growth fund, multiplied by the standard deviation
of the Eternal Growth fund, which is 25%.
And the Sharpe ratio of the market portfolio is 0.25.
This means that the portfolio of the endowment fund
is not efficient, and its risk-return trade-off
can be improved by reallocating assets from the Eternal Growth
fund to the market portfolio.
It is also useful to represent the situation graphically.
On this chart, I've plotted the capital market line.
I've plotted the market portfolio.
This is the red dot.
It has expected return of 10% and the standard deviation
of 20%.
I've plotted the Eternal Growth fund,
which has the standard deviation of 25% and expected
return of 10%.
And I also plotted the endowment fund portfolio.
That's the yellow dot.
It has 9% expected return and 20% standard deviation.
You can see that the Sharpe ratio, which
is the slope of the line that connects
the risk-free rate and the endowment fund and the Eternal
Growth fund, is lower than the slope
of the solid blue line, which is the capital market line.
Therefore, this graph confirms the inefficiency
of the endowment fund's portfolio.