
PROFESSOR: In this video, we're given a portfolio
with a known expected return.
We will assume that it is priced by the capital asset pricing
model.
And we will learn how to find its beta, standard deviation,
and its correlation with the market portfolio.
Suppose that the expected return on the market portfolio is 14%,
and the standard deviation of its returns is 25%.
The risk-free rate is 6%.
Consider a portfolio with expected return of 16%,
and assume that it is located on the capital market line.
In other words, assume that it is priced by the capital asset
pricing model.
What is the beta of this portfolio?
What is the standard deviation?
And what is the correlation of this portfolio with the market?
Let's start with the first question.
The CAPM model says that the expected return on a portfolio
P equals to the risk-free rate plus beta of this portfolio
multiplied by the expected return on the market portfolio
minus the risk-free rate.
We're given the expected return on our portfolio P. It is 16%.
We're given the risk-free rate, which is 6%.
And we're given the expected return
on the market portfolio, which is 14%.
So we can solve this equation for beta
and find that the beta of this portfolio is 1.25.
To find the standard deviation of this portfolio, let's
replicate it with the market portfolio
and the risk-free asset.
Since this portfolio, which we will call P,
is efficient because it is on the capital market line,
the expected return and the standard deviation
of this portfolio should be the same as the expected return
and standard deviation of the replicating portfolio, which
we'll call R. And, since we know the standard deviation of both
the market portfolio, which is 25%,
and the risk-free asset, which is 0%,
we will be able to compute the standard deviation
of this replicating portfolio.
Let's invest w in the risk-free asset and 1 minus w
in the market portfolio.
We want this replicating portfolio
to have the expected return of 16%.
Therefore, we have the following equation--
16% equals to w multiplied by 6%, which
is the return of the risk-free asset, plus 1 minus w
multiplied by the 14%, which is the expected
return on the market.
Solving this equation for w gives us negative 0.25.
This means that the replicating portfolio
is 25% short the risk-free asset and 125% long the market
portfolio.
Since the risk-free asset has zero variance by definition
and the return on the risk-free asset
is not correlated with any other asset, including the market
portfolio, the variance of the replicating portfolio
equals to 1 minus w squared times
the variance of the market portfolio.
Therefore, the standard deviation
of this replicating portfolio R equals to 1 minus w multiplied
by the standard deviation of the market portfolio.
We know that w is negative 0.25.
Therefore, 1 minus w is 1.25.
The standard deviation of the market portfolio
is 25%, which gives us 31.25%.
Therefore, the standard deviation
of the portfolio with 16% expected return is 31.25%.
Finally, let's find the correlation
of this portfolio with the market.
Recall that beta of portfolio P is
the ratio of the covariance of returns of this portfolio
P with the market portfolio divided
by the variance of the market portfolio, which equals
to the correlation between portfolio P and M
multiplied by the standard deviation of returns
on portfolio P divided by the standard deviation
of the market portfolio.
We already know the beta of this portfolio
P, which we computed in the first part of this question.
It is 1.25.
And we know the standard deviation
of this portfolio, which we computed in the second part
of this question.
It is 31.25%.
So putting this all together gives us
the following equation.
Solving this equation for rho gives us 1.
Therefore, the correlation between the returns
on this portfolio P and the returns on the market portfolio
M is equal to 1.
