
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to empirically estimate CAPM betas.
We will work with eight firms: four gold mining firms,
and four technology firms.
These are the same firms we used to estimate two-factor APT
model in the first part of this course.
The table on your screen shows you firm names and location
of their headquarters.
Our data set contains monthly return observations
for each firm from January 2005, until December 2019.
Therefore, for each firm we have 180 monthly return
observations.
Returns are given in column C. We're also
given the risk free rate in column D.
And we're given market return in column E.
To estimate the CAPM model, we need
to run the regression of excess return
on a stock on a constant, and on the excess market return.
Therefore, the first step for us is
to compute the excess return for each of our stocks
and to compute excess market return.
To compute excess return, I'm taking the return on the stock
and I'm subtracting the risk free rate.
And to compute excess market return,
I'm taking the market return and I'm
subtracting the risk free rate.
Let's start by estimating the CAPM model for the first stock.
There are multiple ways to run a linear regression in Excel,
I will use LINEST function, the same function
I used in the first part of the course
when we estimated the APT model.
It requires four inputs.
The first input is the left hand side variable,
which in our case is the excess return on the stock.
The second input is the vector of known axis,
which in our case is the excess market return, just one vector.
The third input to this function is whether the regression
is run with a constant or not.
We want to have a constant.
And the fourth parameter is for additional regression
statistics, which we don't need in this case.
So this is an array function.
We need to hit Shift Control Enter at the same time
so that we estimate both beta and alpha in the CAPM equation.
We see that the CAPM beta for the Kinross Gold Corporation
is 0.54 and CAPM alpha for this stock is 0.45%
Next let's estimate the CAPM regression for Apple stock.
We have Apple data further the down in this array.
And I will select excess returns as my y variable, excess market
returns as my x variable.
And I'll put the other two parameters as one and zero.
So this gives us the CAPM beta for Apple of 1.07
and the CAPM alpha for the stock, 2.05%.
I have estimated the CAPM regression
for the remaining six stocks and here are the results.
CAPM betas for gold mining stocks vary from 0.32 to 0.54.
And CAPM betas for technology stocks vary from 0.89 to 1.07.
These results show that gold mining stocks
have much lower return sensitivity
with respect to the market when compared to technology stocks.
Now we can use estimated betas to find future expected returns
using the capital asset pricing model.
Let's assume that future monthly expected return on the market
is 0.8%.
This is roughly 10% effective annual rate.
According to the capital asset pricing model,
the expected excess return on the stock
is given by beta times the expected excess return
on the market.
Now we can use this equation to find expected excess returns
on our stocks.
For Kinross Gold Corporation, it's
going to be beta of the stock multiplied
by the expected excess return on the market portfolio.
So the answer is going forward, the stock
is expected to return 0.43%.
We can extend this array and compute expected excess returns
for the remaining gold stocks and also for the technology
stocks.
For comparison, let's also compute
historical average excess returns
during our sample period, 2005 to 2019.
To do this, I'm using the average function
and our excess returns on each individual stock
to compute these averages.
We can see that the average historical return
for gold mining stocks ranges from 0.64 to 0.84%
and for technology stock, it ranges from 1% for Intel
to 2.84% for Apple.
Notice that for all eight of our stocks
the expected returns computed using the capital asset pricing
model are lower than the historical average returns.
Recall that the reason why we prefer to rely on asset pricing
models, such as the CAPM or the APT
to compute expected returns instead of using
historical averages is that it is extremely difficult
to infer average returns from historical data.
To demonstrate this, let's compute
95% confidence intervals for our estimates of average returns.
For each of our eight stocks, I compute
a historical standard deviation, which
I used to compute 95% confidence interval.
And in the last two columns.
I computed the lower and the upper bounds of this 95%
confidence interval.
We can see that for each stock the range is very wide.
For example, for the first stock the estimate
of average monthly return falls from negative 1.36% to positive
3.04% with a 95% probability.
This imprecision is exactly why in finance we
use asset pricing models to forecast future returns.
