
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how a firm's financial leverage affects its equity
risk.
Company XYZ is a publicly traded firm.
The current share price of XYZ is $22.50.
The total number of outstanding shares is 20 million.
XYZ has 525,000 bonds outstanding,
each with a face value of $100, maturing one year from now.
Bonds do not pay coupon and are considered risk-free.
XYZ's stock has a market beta of 0.8.
The expected market risk premium is 6%,
and the risk-free rate is 5%.
We will answer the following questions.
What is the current market value of the firm?
What is the market beta of the firm?
Suppose that beta of the firm's assets and the expected
interest rates are constant over the next two years.
What is the expected price of the stock in two years if it
does not pay dividends?
We will assume that the performance
of the company in year 1 does not predict its performance
in year 2.
Finally, if the firm issues 551,250
two-year, zero-coupon bonds with a face value of $100 each
to buy back its stock, will it change
the equity beta of the firm?
If yes, compute the new equity beta.
Suppose that investors consider these new bonds risk-free.
Let's first find the current market value of the firm.
Since this firm has both equity and debt in its capital
structure, the market value of this firm
would equal to the current market
value of equity plus the current market value of debt.
So let's find each of them.
The current market value of equity
would equal to the current share price multiplied
by the total number of shares outstanding.
In this case, this is $22.50 multiplied by 20 million.
This gives us $450 million.
And the current market value of debt
is simply the total face value of debt,
which is $100, multiplied by 525,000 bonds discounted
to present at the risk-free rate.
We're discounting at the risk-free rate
because this debt is considered, by the market participants,
risk-free.
Therefore, the current market value of this firm's debt
is $50 million.
Also note that we're discounting this by one year
because this debt is due in one year.
This gives us the current market value
of the firm, which we also refer to as the current market
value of the firm's assets.
It equals to $500 million.
Next, let's find the market beta of the firm's assets.
Recall two facts.
First, the firm's assets are a portfolio
of its equity and debt.
And, two, the beta of a portfolio
is a weighted average of betas of assets in the portfolio.
This implies that asset beta is the weighted average
of equity beta and debt beta, where the weights are
the fraction of equity and debt in the capital
structure of the firm.
Recall that this firm's debt is risk-free.
Therefore, its market beta equals to 0.
Hence, we have the following.
Asset beta equals to the market value
of equity divided by the sum of the market value of equity
and the market value of debt multiplied by the equity beta.
This gives us $450 million divided by $500 million
multiplied by 0.8.
And this gives us 0.72.
Therefore, the beta of this firm's assets is 0.72.
Note that the assets of the firm are safer than equity.
The market beta is 0.72 versus the beta of equity of 0.8.
This is because the presence of debt
amplifies the risk of equity.
The higher is the fraction of debt in a firm's capital
structure, which we refer to as leverage, the higher
is its equity risk.
Next, let's find the expected stock price in year 2.
Recall the dividend discount model,
which says that the stock price today equals to dividend
in year 1 discounted to present plus dividend in year 2
plus the value of the stock in year 2 discounted to present.
The discount rates, r1 and r2, are the returns
on the stock in years 1 and 2.
Since this stock does not pay dividends, its price in year 2
would equal to its current price multiplied by 1 plus r1
and multiplied by 1 plus r2.
Taking the expectation, we'd get the following.
Expected stock price in year 2 equals
to the current price multiplied by the expectation
of the following product--
1 plus stock return in year 1 multiplied by 1 plus stock
return in year 2.
Since we assume that stock performance in year 1
is not correlated with its performance in year 2,
we can break down the expectation of the product of 1
plus r1 and 1 plus r2 into the product of expectations.
This gives us the following expression.
Expected stock price in year 2 equals to the current stock
price multiplied by 1 plus expected return in year 1
multiplied by expected return in year 2.
We can use our standard notation, r bar,
to denote these expected returns.
Therefore, to determine the expected stock price in year 2,
we need to find the expected returns in years 1 and 2.
We will use the capital asset pricing model
to find these returns.
Expected return in year 1 equals to the risk-free rate
plus equity beta multiplied by the market risk premium.
Recall that the risk-free rate is 5%.
The equity beta was given to us, and it's 0.8.
And the market risk premium is 6%.
Therefore, year 1 expected return is 9.8%.
To find expected return in year 2,
recall that the firm pays off bonds at the end of year 1.
And, during the second year, this firm does not have debt.
In other words, it becomes an all-equity financed firm.
This means that equity beta during the second year
equals asset beta, which is 0.72.
Therefore, the expected return in year 2 is 9.32%.
Putting this all together, we find that the expected share
price in year 2 equals $27.01.
Finally, let's answer the question in part d.
Suppose that the firm issues 551,250
two-year, zero-coupon bonds with $100 face value each.
What is the new equity beta?
First, due to the leverage effect,
we expect equity beta to increase.
To find equity beta, let's use the equation
that ties asset beta to equity and debt betas.
Since both old and new tranche of debt are risk-free,
this equation collapses to the following one--
asset beta equals to the market value
of equity divided by the sum of the market value of equity
and the market value of debt multiplied by equity beta.
Rearranging this equation, we get the following-- equity beta
equals to the value of equity plus the value of debt,
which is just the total value of assets
of the firm, divided by the value of equity multiplied
by asset beta.
Note that the value of the firm does not
change as a result of this new debt issuance
because we're using cash proceeds to buy back shares.
To find the new value of equity, we
need to find the new value of debt
and subtract it from the total value of the firm.
The current market value of this new tranche of debt
is $50 million.
We're using 5% discount rate because this debt
is considered risk-free.
Note that we're discounting it by two years
because it matures in two years.
The total value of debt of this firm
is the sum of the market values of the old debt
and the new debt, which together give us $100 million.
Therefore, the new value of equity
of this firm after the bond issuance and share buyback
is $400 million.
Putting this all together, we find that the new equity
beta is 0.9.
Recall that the original equity beta was 0.8.
Therefore, issuing this new tranche of debt
increases equity beta of this firm from 0.8 to 0.9.
