PROFESSOR: In this video, we will demonstrate how
to value firms that are financed with both equity
and debt in situations when firms are subject to taxation.
Equity Residential, which is a publicly traded real estate
investment trust that invests in apartments,
is considering opening a new mixed-use property
in Kendall Square.
The property is expected to start generating cash
flow in year one.
The first cash flow is expected to be $55 million,
and this amount will grow at a rate of 2% per year
from then on.
Assume that Equity Residential pays out all of its earnings
to shareholders as dividends.
We will also assume that shareholders
pay no taxes on dividends.
Suppose that the cost of capital for this property is 20%.
Equity Residential faces a corporate tax rate of 25%.
In part a, we will assume that the property will
be financed with 100% equity.
And we will find its current market value
under this assumption.
In part b, we will assume that Equity Residential
is considering to borrow $200 million
to finance this property development.
This financing will either take a form
of a perpetual bond or a rolling term loan, in which case
the company will be re-borrowing the same principal amount
of maturity to cover the principal payment.
In either of these two cases, Equity Residential
is expected to pay only interest payments each year.
Suppose that the annual interest rate will be 10%.
Also assume, for simplicity, that this interest rate
will not change.
What is the current market value of this property
under this financing arrangement?
Let's first find the market value of this property
if it is 100% equity financed.
The after-tax cash flow in year one will be $41.25 million.
The first year cash flow will grow in perpetuity
at a 2% rate.
Given the discount rate of 20%, this
implies that the current market value of this property
is $229.17 million.
Next, let's find the value of this property
if it is financed with $200 million perpetual loan
with an interest rate of 10%.
When firms are subject to taxation,
the Modigliani-Miller result that
demonstrates that capital structure does not
affect firm value no longer holds
because debt creates valuable interest tax shields.
The value of the firm with debt, which we call levered firm,
equals to the value of the unlevered firm
plus the present value of interest tax shields.
We have already found the value of the unlevered firm
in part a.
Therefore, to find the value of the levered firm,
we need to find the present value of interest tax
shields generated by this loan.
The annual interest on this loan is 10% times $200 million,
which equals to $20 million.
The annual interest tax shield equals
to the tax rate, which is 25% times the interest, which
is $20 million.
This gives us $5 million.
This loan generates $5 million annual interest tax shields
in perpetuity.
Therefore, the present value is simply the annual tax shield
divided by the interest rate.
That is $5 million divided by 10%.
This gives us $50 million.
Combining the unlevered value with the present value
of interest tax shields, we obtain the levered value
of this property.
It is $279.17 million.
Let's also find the current value of equity.
It equals to the levered firm value minus the value of debt.
That is $279.17 million minus $200 million,
which gives us $79.17 million.
Given the current values of equity and debt,
we can find the current debt-to-equity ratio.
It equals to $200 million divided by $79.17 million,
which equals to 2.53.
Let's answer another question.
What would be the debt-to-equity ratio
of this property in year 10?
To find it, we need to find the values of debt and equity
in year 10.
First, because the loan is perpetual or being rolled over
indefinitely, its value will remain $200 million forever.
Second, since cash flows grow in perpetuity,
this means that the firm value will
grow in perpetuity as well.
And since debt remains constant, it
implies that equity value will be growing over time.
Let's first find the value of the unlevered firm in the year
10.
It equals to the after-tax cash flow in the year 11
divided by r minus g.
Cash flow in year 11 can be found
as the cash flow in year one times
1 plus g raised to the power of 10.
This gives us the unlevered firm value of $279.35 million.
To find levered firm value in year 10,
we're adding to the unlevered value
the value of tax shields in the year 10.
That is all tax shields that will
accrue from year 11 onwards.
Since debt is perpetual, this value equals to $50 million,
the same value as the present value of tax shields.
This gives us the total firm value of $329.35 million.
Knowing the firm value, we can find equity value
by subtracting the value of debt.
It's $329.35 million minus $200 million.
This equals to $129.35 million.
Knowing the values of debt and equity,
we can finally find the debt-to-equity ratio
in the year 10.
It equals to 1.55.
Recall that in year 10, this ratio was 2.53.
This decline is attributed to the growing value of equity.
Since debt remains constant in perpetuity
and the firm value grows at 2% in perpetuity,
the debt-to-equity ratio will eventually converge to 0.
