
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider a corporate finance situation,
known as Debt Overhang.
Consider a two-period setting.
Today's year is 0.
Next year is year 1.
We will assume that all investors are risk neutral,
and that the risk-free rate is 0%.
These assumptions are made for convenience,
as they would allow us to simply work
with physical probabilities and ignore time value of money.
Next year, the economy can take one of the three states--
Good, Okay, or Bad.
The probability of the good state is 1/6.
The probability of the Okay state is 1/3.
And the probability of the bad state is 1/2.
There is a hypothetical firm whose assets
will be worth $100 in the Good state, $50 in the Okay state,
and $20 in the Bad state.
The firm has outstanding debt with face value $50 due
in a year 1.
Management of the firm has identified a new project,
which requires an investment of $6 in year 0,
and pays off $10 in year one with certainty.
Management understands that this project has positive NPV of $4,
and therefore, should be taken, but does not have cash
available to finance this project.
Therefore, it considers raising external financing
to fund this project.
There are three available financing options.
Option 1 is to raise new debt junior to existing debt.
Option 2 is to raise new equity.
And option 3 is to raise new debt, senior to existing debt.
You're hired as a financial advisor
to the management of the firm.
Determine which of these three options are feasible,
and advise on the best financing option.
First, let's determine the current value
of debt and equity without the new project.
The following table shows values of debt and equity
in all three states in year 1.
Recall that the face value of debt is $50.
Therefore, in Good and Okay states,
the value of the firm's assets is high enough
to pay the full face value back.
In the bad state, however, the value of assets is only $20,
which is not enough to pay the full $50 back to debt holders.
In this case, the value of debt is $20.
Equity holders are worth $50 in the Good state,
which is computed as the difference
between the value of assets and the face value of the bond.
In the Okay state and in the Bad state, the equity is worth 0.
The current value of debt equals to the probability
of the Good state, which is 1/6, multiplied by the value of debt
in that state, which is 50, plus probability
of the Okay state, which is 1/3, multiplied by the value of debt
in that state, which is 50, plus probability of the Bad
state, which is 1/2, multiplied by the value of debt
in that state, which is 20.
This gives us $35.
The current value of equity equals
to the probability of the Good state, which
is 1/6, multiplied by the value of equity in the Good state,
which is 50.
The value of equity in the other two states is 0.
Hence, the current value of equity equals to $8.33.
Let's now consider the first financing option, junior debt.
Let's first find the face value of this new junior debt.
Suppose that the face value is x dollars, where x is less than
or equal than 10.
Recall that the project generates the value of $10.
And hence, the total value of assets in the year 1
will be $110 in the Good state, $60 in the Okay state,
and $30 in the Bad state.
The value of existing debt will be $50 in the Good state,
$50 in the Okay state, and $30 in the Bad state.
Therefore, the payoff to junior debt holders
will be x in the Good and the Okay states,
and 0 in the Bad state.
In order to price this debt, recall that the project
requires $6 to finance.
Since all investors are risk neutral and the risk rate is 0,
$6 should equal to the expected payoff from the bond in year 1.
This gives us $12.
Recall that we assume that x should be less than 10.
If it's 12, the value of assets in year 1 in the Okay state
is not high enough to repay the full face value back.
Let's revisit this assumption and assume
that x is greater than 10.
Then the payoff to junior debt holders in the Good state
will be x.
In the Okay state, it will be 10.
And in the Bad state, it will remain 0.
This gives us the new pricing equation.
Solving this, we get $16.
Therefore, for junior debt holders,
to agree to fund this project, the face value of the bond
has to be $16.
With this face value of new junior debt,
the payoff to equity holders will be $44 in the Good state,
and $0 in the Okay and Bad states.
The value of equity in year 0 will be $7.33.
Therefore, equity holders will not
be in favor of this financing arrangement,
because it increases their value by $1--
from $8.33 to $7.33.
Let's now consider the second financing option, equity.
In this case, the value of equity in year one
is $60 in the Good state, $10 in the Okay state,
and $0 in the Bad state.
The value of equity in year 0 equals
to the negative $6 spent to finance
the project, plus the expected payoff in year 1,
which is 1/6 times 60 plus 1/3 times 10.
This gives us $7.33.
Therefore, equity holders will not
agree to finance this project, because doing
so decreases their value from $8.33 to $7.33,
effectively resulting in negative NPV of $1.

Finally, let's consider the last financing option, senior debt.
Senior debt will effectively be risk free,
because the value of assets in all three states of the world
is high enough to not default on the promised payment.
Therefore, senior debt will have face value of $6.
The payoff to existing debt holders
will be $50 in the Good state, $50 in the Okay state,
and $24 in the Bad state.
The pay off to equity holders will be $54 in the Good state,
$4 in the Okay state, and $0 in the Bad state.
The current value of equity under this financing
arrangement will be $10.33.
Equity holders would therefore want to finance this project,
because it increases their value from $8.33 to $10.33.
What about existing debt holders?
The current value under this financing arrangement
becomes $37.
Therefore, existing debt holders will also
be supportive of this plan.
Let's summarize our findings.
Financing this project with either junior debt or equity
isn't feasible, because it lowers the value
of current shareholders.
Since they're the decision makers in the firm,
they will decide not to take this project.
On the other hand, if the project
is financed with senior debt, both equity holders
and current debt holders benefit.
And hence, they'll be in favor of this project.
This explains why we often observe that existing debt
holders agree to subordinate themselves
to new tranches of debt, because in distress situations, when
a firm is plagued by debt overhang,
financing new positive NPV projects benefits existing debt
holders.
Finally, note that the positive NPV created
by the project, which is $4, is split
between the equity holders and current debt
holders, each of whom get $2.
