
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will learn how
to value interest tax shields.
Boston Properties is a publicly traded real estate investment
trust, headquartered in Boston.
Suppose that it has just issued a perpetual bond
with a $10 million face value.
Suppose that BP will pay interest only on this debt.
Assume that the tax rate is 25%.
We will answer the following questions.
If interest rate on this debt is 6%,
what is the annual interest tax shield?
What is the present value of interest tax shields
generated by this bond?
Suppose instead that the interest rate is 5%.
What is the present value of the interest tax
shields in this case?
Let's start by computing the annual interest tax shield.
Recall that interest tax shield is the tax rate multiplied
by the interest expense.
Therefore, let us first find the annual interest expense.
It is simply the interest tax rate,
which is 6%, multiplied by the face value of the bond,
which is $10 million.
This gives us $600,000.
To compute interest tax shield, we multiply tax rate
by the interest expense.
25% times $600,000.
This gives us 150,000.
Therefore, annual interest tax shield generated by this bond
is $150,000.
Next, let's compute the present value of interest tax shields.
Since this is a perpetual bond, it
generates $150,000 annual interest tax shield
in perpetuity.
Therefore, its present value is simply the annual tax shield
divided by the interest rate.
That is $150,000 divided by 6%.
This gives us $2.5 million.
Therefore, the present value of the tax shields generated
by this bond is $2.5 million.
What would be the present value of interest tax shields
if the interest rate was 5%?
Let's see how the present value of tax shields
depends on the interest rate.
Present value of tax shields is the annual tax rate tau
times interest divided by R, because in this case,
tax shields are perpetual.
Since interest expense is interest rate times the face
value of the bond, we get tau times R
times face value divided by R.
We see that R cancels out.
And the present value of tax shields
is simply tax rate times the face value of the bond.
Hence, the present value of tax shields
generated by perpetual bonds does not
depend on interest rate.
In our case, the present value is still $2.5 million.
Now, suppose that instead of issuing a perpetual bond,
Boston Properties has issued a $10 million
face value bond with a maturity of 15 years.
Assume that the bond pays an annual coupon rate of 5%
and that the bond has been issued at par.
What is the present value of interest tax shields
generated by this bond?
The annual interest tax shield, in this case, is $125,000.
These tax shields represent a 15 year
annuity and its present value is the annual tax
shield divided by R multiplied by the 15 year annuity factor.
Plugging in the interest rate of 5%,
we find that the present value of tax shields in this case
is $1.3 million.
Notice that this value is roughly half
of the value of tax shields generated
by the perpetual bond.
Note that in situations when bonds have finite term,
the present value of tax shields does depend
on the value of interest rate.
For example, if the interest rate was 6%,
the value of tax shields in this case
would have increased to $1.46 million.
