
PROFESSOR: Although we have been advocating the NPV
rule for capital budgeting decisions, in practice,
other rules are also used.
We can list some of the common ones--
the payback period, internal rate of return,
sometimes also called IRR, profitability index,
sometimes also called PI, and so on.
As is often the case, for the correct answer,
there's only one, while for the not so correct answers,
there are many.
We will show a more extended list of these alternative rules
by the end of this lecture.
Firms use these rules for various reasons.
First, they were used historically,
and habits die hard.
Second, they may have worked in previous situations, often
combined with common sense and other considerations.
Third, under certain circumstances,
they do give the same answer as NPV.
But in general, they don't agree with NPV.
Therefore, it is important to note that the NPV rule
dominates these alternatives.
Nonetheless, given their presence in practice,
we will discuss some of these alternative rules,
their validity, and limitations.
The first rule we consider is based on the so-called payback
period of a project.
A project's payback period is defined as the minimum time,
denoted by s, such that the sum of net cash
flows from the project turns positive.
In other words, it is the time taken
for the sum of the projects' subsequent payoffs
to just cover the initial investment.
This is formally given by the equation highlighted
on this slide.
The capital budgeting rule based on the payback period
first specifies a threshold payback time--
say, t star.
Then for independent projects, accept all those
with payback period not exceeding the threshold.
For mutually exclusive projects, among the projects
with payback periods not exceeding the threshold,
accept the one with the minimum payback period.
Let's consider an example to illustrate this rule.
Suppose that the payback threshold is three years,
and we have two projects, 1 and 2.
Their dollar cash flows are given in the table,
in thousand dollars.
Their payback periods are four and three years, respectively,
as given in the last column in the table.
This is easily seen.
Take project one, for example.
The initial investment is 100 in year zero.
Positive payoff starts at 20 in year one, then 40 in year two,
with the sum being 60; then 30 in year three,
with the sum being 90; and then 10 in year four,
with the sum being 100, which just
equals the initial investment.
Therefore, its payback period is four years.

With the cutoff payback period being three,
the firm will reject project one and accept project two.
But looking at the two projects more carefully,
and what the payback period does,
it has two obvious shortcomings.
First, the rule ignores cash flows
after that payback period.
For example, project one has substantial cash flows
in year five and six which are totally
ignored in the decision.
Second, the rule ignores discounting.
Both of these omissions can lead to deviations
from the optimal decision.
To see this, let's assume that the proper discount
rate is 10% for both projects.
We can then compute their NPVs.
In particular, project one has an NPV of roughly $39,000,
while project two has an NPV of roughly minus $7,000.
But by the payback rule, project two
was accepted, not project 1.
One can think of possible fixes to overcome
the rule's shortcomings.
For example, incorporating proper discounting,
one can define the discounted payback period
as the time it takes for the sum of the discounted cash flow
first exceeds the initial investment.
This is better than before, but still ignores the cash flows
after the discounted payback period.