
PROFESSOR: A project's cash flows
can arise in different accounting forms.
One of them is change in inventory.
Let's consider a simple example.
Suppose that you are running a chain of shoe stores.
The financials are as follows.
This quarter, you buy 1 million pairs
of shoes at a price of $30 each.
You expect to sell all of them in the next two
quarters, 500,000 per quarter at a price of $60.
The effective tax rate is 40%.
What are the cash flows for this project?

The financial data are summarized in the table.
The first column is time in quarters.
The second column gives the after tax accounting profit.
In quarter 0, it's $0.
In quarter 1, the accounting profit
is sales, which is $0.5 million times profit margin, which
is $60 minus $30, the sale price minus costs
for each pair of shoes then times 1 minus the tax rate.
This gives an after tax accounting profit of $9 million
per quarter.
But this is not the actual after tax cash rule.
In particular, the cost of shoes are paid in quarter 0
in the form of inventory, not in quarter 1 and 2.

There are different ways to deal with this issue.
One way is to directly go after the project's cash flow, which
is given in the last column in a table.
In particular, in quarter 0, we paid a total of $30 million
for an inventory of 1 million pairs of shoes at $30 a pair.
This is a cash flow of minus $30 million.
In quarter 1, the revenue is 0.5 million pairs
of shoes sold times the sales price of $60.
That gives us $30 million.
The tax bill is operating profit,
which is 0.5 million times $60 minus $30,
times the tax rate of 40%, which gives $6 million.
Net of the two items gives an after tax cash flow
of $24 million.
It's repeated in quarter 2.
Another way is to look also at the inventory, which is
given in column 3 in the table.
Since inventory carries a price, its change
implies a cash flow-- in particular,
a change in inventory implies an opposite cash flow
of the same amount.
Therefore, for quarter 0, inventory
increases by $30 million.
It implies a cash flow of minus $30 million, the amount of cash
paid for that inventory.
For quarter 1 and 2, inventory decreases by $15 million
respectively.
Yet that implies a cash flow of plus $15 million,
the amount recouped from selling the inventory.
If we add these implied cash flows to the after tax
accounting profit, the cash flow will be 0 minus $30 million.
That equals minus $30 million in quarter 0.
$9 plus $15, which equals $24 million
in quarter 1 and quarter 2.
This is the same as what we have obtained previously
in the last column.
From this, we see that with changing inventory,
a project's cash flow can also be computed as its after tax
accounting profit minus the change in inventory,
which is given in the equation at the bottom of the slide.
In general, there are timing differences
between the accounting measure of earnings or profit,
which is given by sales minus cost of goods sold
and the actual cash flows.
This is specifically reflected in changes in working capital,
which includes several parts.
A simple definition of working capital is as follows.
It equals inventory plus accounts receivable
minus accounts payable.
As we have seen from the previous example,
changes in working capital such as inventory
implied actual cash flows.
Let's consider this in more detail.
First, inventory.
In computing earnings and profits, the cost of goods sold
includes the cost of items sold in that period.
The actual cost of these items may occur in different periods.
When inventory is rising, the cost of goods sold
understates the cash outflows.
When inventory is falling, the cost of goods sold
overstates the cash outflows.
The second item is accounts receivable.
Accounting sales may include sales
that have not been paid for, which
goes into accounts receivable.
Therefore, accounting sales understate cash inflows
if the firm is receiving payments from past sales.
This corresponds to decreases in accounts receivable.
The third item in working capital is accounts payable.
Conceptually, this is just the reverse of accounts receivable.
Therefore, with changing working capital,
the after tax cash flow of a project
needs to include an additional term, which is minus
the change in working capital as shown
in the equation on this slide.