
PROFESSOR: The next rule we consider
is based on the internal rate of return, or IRR.
A project's IRR is defined as the number
that gives a zero if used to discount
all the project's cash flows.
Mathematically, it is defined by the equation on this slide.
Clearly, IRR, if it exists, is solely
determined by the project's cash flow.
We don't need any other information.
The decision rule based on IRR is as follows.
First, a threshold rate or a hurdle rate, IRR star, is set.
Then, for independent projects, accept
all the projects with IRR greater
than the hurdle rate, IRR star.
For mutually exclusive projects, among the projects with IRRs
greater than the hurdle rate, accept
the one with the highest IRR.
Let's consider an example to illustrate the use of IRR rule.
Again, consider two projects, 1 and 2, with cash flows
given in the table on the slide.
These are the same two projects considered
for the payback rule.
We can find their IRRs through numerical solutions.
As it turns out, project 1 has an IRR of 21%,
and project 2 has an IRR of 7%.
At a hurdle rate of 10%, say, only project 1
will be accepted.
This is the same choice as from the NPV rule as we saw earlier.
Although IRR is widely used in practice,
there's no guarantee that it gives the right answer.
The IRR rule leads to the same decision as the NPV rule
when the following conditions are met.
First, cash outflow occurs only at time 0.
Or more generally, cash flow changes side only once.
Second, only one project is under consideration.
Using IRR to rank projects is problematic,
as we'll see in a minute.
Third, opportunity cost of capital
is the same for all periods.
From the definition of IRR, It is
used to discount cash flows for all different periods.
As we said before, in general, cash flows at different times
should be discounted at different rates,
according to their timing and risk.
Fourth, the hurdle rate is set to be the same
as the cost of capital.
Since IRR is determined solely by a project's cash flow,
some people argue that it is easy to use
because it requires no finance expertise, which
is about discount rates.
But this is not quite right.
Even with IRR, the rule relies on the right hurdle rate.
Given the popularity of IRR rule in practice,
we want to point out some potential issues in its use.
We start from the more technical ones,
and then move on to the more serious ones.
First, given the project's cash flow,
there may not exist an IRR.
Sometimes there may be more than one IRR.
We show this with two examples.

The table on the top left of the slide
gives the cash flow of a project.
The figure on the top right plots
the discounted value of the cash flow at an arbitrary discount
rate, r.
An IRR is given by the point where
the cash flow's discounted value curve crosses the x-axis.
Clearly, in this case the curve never reaches
the x-axis, implying no solution for the IRR.
The table on the bottom left gives another cash flow
and the figure on the right plots the cash flow's
discounted value curve.
Here, the curve crosses the x-axis at two places.
One is between 0 and 0.05, and another between 0.1 and 0.15.
Which one should we pick, then, in this case?
No obvious answer.
Obviously, in these two cases the project's cash flow
changes side twice, violating one of the conditions needed
for IRR to work.
Next, we show that IRR cannot be used to rank projects when
choosing between them.
We show this with an example.
The example describes two projects, 1 and 2.
The cash flows are given in the table on the slide,
in row 2 and 3.
Column 3 gives their IRRs 100% and 80%, respectively.
Suppose the hurdle rate is 10% the cost
of capital for these projects.
Then both projects pass the hurdle.
If they are mutually independent, we will do both.
However, if these two projects are mutually exclusive,
we have to choose one between them.
Clearly, then, project 1 wins because it has a higher IRR.
If we compute their NPVs at the cost of capital
of 10%, which I give it in the last column in the table, then
project 2 should be taken because it has a higher NPV.
What's going on here?
Well, if we look at the two cash flows more carefully,
we'll notice that project 2 is a bigger project with larger cash
flows.
Even though it has a smaller IRR,
its larger scale leads to a larger NPV.
Given that we want to maximize the total market value,
project 2 clearly delivers more.
What we learn is that IRR, being a rate itself,
does not capture the scale of the project.
Therefore, you will miss the scale factor
when it's used to rank projects which
may well have different scales.