
PROFESSOR: We now focus on a firm's capital budgeting
decisions.
The objective is to increase the firm's current market value.
The decision depends on the valuation of each project
under consideration.
Consider a project with cash flow from now to year t.
Let's cf0 be the initial cash flow and cf1 to cft
be its expected future cash flows.
Let the discount rate be r1 to rt for the corresponding cash
flows.
The NPV of the project is then given
by the following discounted cash flow formula.
It is simply the sum of the present values of all
the pieces in the cash flow.
This gives the increase in the firm's current market
value if the project is taken.

With the NPV of each project available to the firm,
we can easily write down the decision rule on investments
or capital budgeting.
For a single project, take it only if its NPV is positive.
For multiple independent projects,
take all those with positive NPVs.
Here, independent means the projects
are unrelated to each other.
An example of independent projects
is to develop condos in far apart cities.
For mutually exclusive projects, take the one
with positive and the highest MPV.
Here, mutually exclusive means we can only do one.
An example of mutually exclusive projects
is when to build the same condo--
right now, next year, or later.
Now, all we need to do is to compute the project's NPV.
This requires three inputs.
First, its cash flow--
more precisely, its expected cash flow.
Second, the right discount rates for the cash flow.
Third, strategic options embedded in the project
beyond the basic casual forecasts.
We will focus merely on one here and return to two and three
later in part two of the course.
Before we get into the details of figuring out
the cash flow of the project, several general points
are worth mentioning.
First, for valuation purposes, we
need to use actual cash flows, not accounting earnings.
Although we often rely on accounting information
to learn about a project's cash flow,
we have to do so carefully.
Earnings reported in accounting statements
follow certain accounting rules which
may not adhere to the actual timing of the cash flow.
As we already know, timing is a key element in valuation
and needs to be captured accurately.
We will see examples on this point soon.
Second, use after tax cash flows.
We have already made this point when we first discussed
the present value calculation.
Shareholders or investors only care
about the cash flow they actually receive after taxes.
In the corporate finance context,
firms do have to pay corporate taxes.

Third, it is important that we only
include cash flows attributable to the project.
This will then give us the net gain
from the project in firm value.
This leads to various implications
when computing a project's cash flows.
Here, we list a few.
One, use incremental cash flows.
There's no need to include unrelated cash flows
since we only care about the net value added by the project.
Two, ignore sunk costs.
These are cash flows associated with previous decisions,
not the current decision, which is
about the current and future cash flows.
Let the bygones be bygones, as people say.
Third, include investments in working capital.
Fourth, include opportunity cost of using existing facility,
losing existing cells, and so on.
We can go on, but instead of talking about these points
in abstract, we will illustrate them through a set of examples.
Before doing so, we want to give a formal definition
of a project's cash flow, which is given
by the equation on this slide.
The net cash flow equals cash inflow minus cash outflow.
The project's cash inflow is simply its operating revenue.
The outflow, however, consists of three pieces.
First, operating expenses without depreciation.
Second, taxes.
And last, capital expenditures.
This is summarized in the second equation.
We can also rewrite a project's cash flow
in a slightly different way.
First, we define the project's operating profit
as its operating revenue net of operating expenses
without depreciation again.
Next, we consider taxes.
Let the project's effective tax rate be tau.
Then the projects income tax will
be the tax rate tau times the operating profit then
minus the tax rate times the depreciation.
This second term comes from the tax credit
the firm can claim from its capital investments.
Here, we note that accounting depreciation
itself is not a cash flow, but it does affect the project's
after tax cash flow because it can be used
to reduce the firm's tax bill.

Putting things together, we have the following.
The net cash flow of the project equals 1 minus tau
times the operating profit, which
is the after tax profit, minus capital expenditure
plus the tax credit from depreciation.