
INSTRUCTOR: What we will do next is
to go over a series of examples to demonstrate
how to compute a project's cash flow from its financial data.
Naturally, these examples are simplified compared
to real projects, but they do provide useful illustrations
of how to come up with cash flow estimates
in various situations.
For the first example is about the distinction
between accounting earnings and actual cash flows.
The project we're considering is as follows.
It requires a purchase of a machine for $1 million
with a life of 10 years.
The machine will generate an annual revenue of $300,000
at an operating expense of $100,000.
The machine can be depreciated over its lifespan
using straight-line depreciation.
The corporate tax rate is 40%.

The financial information on the project
is summarized in the table.
The first column gives the year.
The second column gives the project's pre-tax accounting
earnings.
Starting from year 1, it is revenue
minus expense minus depreciation,
which equals 300, which is revenue
minus 100, which is expense minus 100,
which is the depreciation.
And that gives $100,000 of pre-tax earnings.
The third column gives the after-tax earnings,
starting from year 1.
That is 1 minus the tax rate times the earnings, which
is $60,000.
However, we should note that you would
be incorrect to simply discount the after-tax earnings
at the cost of capital to get the NPV.
The reason is that the accounting earnings did not
accurately reflect the timing of the project's cash flow.
For example, the initial expenditure, or sometimes
called CapEx of $1 million on the machine
is not recorded as a cash flow in year 0.
Instead, it shows up in the form of depreciation
as part of the expense over the next 10 years.
For evaluation purposes, we cannot arbitrarily shift cash
flows over time without proper discounting.
In order to value the cash flows,
we have to capture the amount and timing correctly.
The actual cash flow from the project
is given in column 4 in the table.
It's computed as follows.
In year 0, the cash flow is minus 1 million,
the CapEx amount paid at that time.
In year 1, the after-tax cash flow
equals the after-tax profit plus the tax credit
from depreciation.
The first part equals 1 minus 0.4, the tax rate,
times the operating profit, which is 300 minus 100,
revenue minus expense, or $200,000.
This gives an after-tax profit of 120K.
The second part equals 0.4, the tax rate,
times the annual depreciation of $100,000, which gives 40K.
The sum of the two gives the total after-tax cash
flow of $160,000.
We have the same after-tax cash flow for the remaining years.

It is obvious that the actual after-tax cash
flow is quite different from the after-tax accounting earnings.
This could be substantial.
In fact, no matter what discount rate we use,
that this kind of value for all accounting earnings
will always be positive.
This is because accounting earnings
are positive for all years, 60,000 every year.
But if we use actual cash flows, the answer is different.
For high enough of a cost of capital, the NPV of the project
becomes negative.
For example, you could try a discount rate of 10%.

This example shows that accounting earnings are not
the same as actual cash flows.
However, if used properly, we can figure out the cash flow
from the accounting information.
Our next example focuses on taxes.
The project's cash flow are given in the table,
which are in thousand dollars.
Assume its tax rate is 50%.
The project spans from year 0, which is now, to year 5,
as shown in row 1.
It requires an initial investment of 500,
shown in row 2.
The operating profit given in the third row is 0 in year 1,
100 year 2, 300 in year 3, et cetera.
That's given in row 3.
Let's assume that the initial capital investment of 500
can be depreciated linearly over the five years to 0 at the end.
This then gives a depreciation of 100
from year 1 to year 5 in the fourth row.
Know that depreciation does not represent the actual cash flow,
but they can be used to reduce taxes.
Row 5 uses the accounting income,
which is the difference between operating profit
and depreciation.
We have minus 100 in year 1, 0 in year 2, 200 in year 3,
and so on.
As seen from the previous example,
this is not the actual income because depreciation is not
itself a cash flow.
Row 6 gives the tax, which is the tax
rate times the operating cash flow,
minus the tax rate times depreciation, the tax credit.
This also equals the tax rate times the accounting income.
We then have minus 50 in year 1, 0 in year 2,
100 in year 3, et cetera.
The after-tax cash flow from the project, given in row 7,
equals operating cash flow minus capital expenditure
minus the tax.
We then have 500 minus, for year 0, 50 for year 1,
100 for year 2, and so on.

There is one caveat here, however.
In year 1, the operating cash flow is 0,
and we have a tax bill of minus 50,
which means a tax credit of 50.
We won't be able to get the tax authority, why is this amount.
However, if the firm has other incomes
it needs to pay taxes on, this tax credit
can be used to reduce the tax bill on these incomes.
$1 saved is $1 earned.
If we can fully utilize this tax credit to save taxes,
it is then equivalent to generating a $50,000 cash flow.
This is what we assume here, for simplicity.
If this tax credit cannot be fully utilized in year 1,
we can then carry it forward to reduce taxes in the following
years, when there is income.
All we have to do, then, is to properly discount
the corresponding tax benefits.

If the cost of capital for this project is 10%,
we can then discount its cash flow after tax.
The NPV we got is $39,000, roughly.
And that's positive.
This example shows how we need to treat taxes carefully
in coming up with a project's cash flows.