
PROFESSOR: Before we finish our introductory discussion
on capital budgeting, there are a few additional points
we would like to make.
The first point is our cash flow forecasts.
The precision of these forecasts is less of a concern,
except that it may reflect the risk of future cash flows.
What is more important is to do our best
to avoid any systematic biases in the forecasts.
Leaving aside intended biases managers may have,
there can be honest mistakes or missed factors.
One example is the response of competitors.
If a project is very profitable, such as a new product
or a new business model, it is easy to think that the profit
will continue for a while.
But the fact is a more profitable project
will more likely attract imitators.
They will cut into the project's future cash flows.
Underestimating future competition
can lead to overly optimistic cash flow forecasts.

Next, in our analysis, we have said
that a firm should take on all the independent projects
with positive NPVs.
This requires that the firm does not face any constraints
in doing so.
One possible constraint is the amount of capital available.
With a well-functioning market, this should not be a problem.
The firm can always raise capital
if it has good projects also recognized by the market.
In reality, however, there could be deviations.
Since large public companies have easy access
to the financial market, capital is rarely
a constraint, except in unusual circumstances,
such as severe information asymmetry or financial crisis.
For small firms, the access to financial market can be costly.
This may impose a soft constraint
on capital, therefore, the firm's ability
to take on more projects.
But the truth of the matter is that good projects
are more scarce than capital.

There are, however, situations in which capital
constraint can be more real.
One example is capital allocation within a firm.
A division inside a firm does not have direct access
to the financial market.
Its capital is often provided by the firm's headquarters.
At a given time, the division may only
have a fixed amount of capital at its disposal.
Such a situation is also called capital rationing.
What do we do, then, with capital rationing?
The answer is fairly straightforward.
Let's think this over.
Suppose that we have N independent projects.
They all have positive NPVs.
For each project I, let its initial investment
be I subscript I, its NPV be NPV subscript I, which
is assumed to be positive.
Let the total amount of capital available
be capital I. What we should do is
to choose the set of projects such
that first the total investment is no greater than capital
I, the total amount of capital allocated to us, and two,
maximizes the total NPV.

The last point we want to make is a more general one.
Our analysis focuses on the computation
of a project's NPV given its cash flow forecasts
and the discount rates.
We did not talk about where these projects come from.
Presumably, they come from the business opportunities
the firm explores-- that is, the real side of the firm.
What finance does is to evaluate them when they show up.
If we find positive NPV for a project,
it will be a bit too simplistic to just go ahead
with the number.
There are additional questions we should ask.
For example, are our assumptions reasonable?
How robust is our answer?
But more importantly, we should think hard about where
the project's value comes from.
For example, is it from the firm's short-run competitive
advantage--
for example, at the right place and the right time--
or is it form long-term competitive advantage,
such as pattern, technology, brand, economy of scale,
et cetera?
Or is it just noise, like pure luck, such as finding $100 bill
on the sidewalk?
It's a positive NPV project to pick it up,
but you're probably not going to be spending a lot of time
on the sidewalk hoping to find another $100 bill.
Our analysis will be more complete and reliable
if we know better about the source of value
from a positive NPV project.
Just having a positive number for NPV
without knowing what is behind it
is far from being sufficient.