
PROFESSOR: The last rule we're going to consider
is based on a project measure called
profitability index, or PI.
The PI of a project is defined as the ratio
between the present value of its future cash flows
by its initial investment.
Formally, it's given by the equation on this slide.
The decision rule based on PI is as follows.
For independent projects, accept all with PI greater than 1.
For mutually exclusive projects, among those
with PI greater than 1, choose the one with the highest PI.
However, PI suffers the same drawback as IRR
in comparing projects with different scales.
In fact, by normalizing the present value of future cash
flows by the initial investment, PI
is intent at removing the scale factor.
Obviously, scale matters for value creation.
More is better.
The example on the slide further illustrates this point.
For the sake of time, we will skip it here.
But you are more than welcome to go over it yourself.
To wrap up our discussion on the alternative rules in capital
budgeting, we briefly present the results
from a survey of CFOs from a broad set of companies.
The figure on the slide shows the percentage
of CFOs surveyed who use a particular capital budgeting
rule.
The y-axis lists the rules used, and the x-axis
gives the percentage of CFOs always or mostly
always use that rule.
Here a few observations from the data.
First, there's a long list of rules being used.
We live in the rich world.
Second, NPV and IRR are on top of the list in terms of usage.
It is indeed the case that IRR has
been around longer than NPV.
Payback is quite popular as well, despite its drawbacks.
And PI is on the list too, but towards the bottom,
despite its wider validity, except for comparing projects.
Third, if we add up the percentage
of all the rules on the list, it way exceeds 100%.
This means that multiple rules are often
used at the same time.
There could be a range of possibilities
for why this is the case.
At one end, don't know which one to use and just
throw a bunch at it.
At the other end, use several rules to complement each other
and to arrive at a more robust answer.
Hopefully, the latter is more often the case.