
PROFESSOR: Given a project's cash flow forecasts,
all we need are the corresponding discount
rates to compute the NPV.
For the discount rates, we have learned the following.
First, the project's discount rate,
which is also called the required rate of return
or the cost of capital, is the expected rate
of return demanded by investors in the market for the project
and for similar traded assets.
Second, discount rate depends on the timing and risk
of the cash flow.
Thus, in general, it can be different for different pieces
of a cash flow.
Third, discount rate is in general different for different
projects.
Fourth, it is in general incorrect to use
a company-wide cost of capital to discount
cash flows of all projects.
The cost of capital is project-specific
and can vary substantially across different projects
with different risks.

What is the discount rate of a project?
In the simple case, a single discount rate
can be used for all cash flows of a project.
This is mostly an approximation.
In the general case, we need to use different discount
rates for different cash flows depending
on their timing and risk.
For example, even with safe cash flows, $1 in different years
should be discounted at different interest rates
if the term structure of interest rates
is not flat, as we have learned from the fixed income market.
We will return to the determination of discount rates
later by applying the risk analysis and asset pricing
tools we have been developing.
But in this lecture, we will use a single discount rate mainly
for simplicity.
Often, we face multiple projects.
As a firm, there are almost unlimited number
of projects it can take.
The key is to find the good ones--
namely, those with positive NPVs.
For mutually independent projects,
we can simply apply the NPV rule to each project.
This implies that we would take up all the projects
with positive NPVs.
For projects dependent of each other--
in particular, mutually exclusive--
we then have to compare the NPVs and pick the highest one,
assuming it is positive.
To illustrate this point, let's consider a simple example.

You have just developed a new product.
The decision now is when to bring it to the market--
say, in year one, two, three, or four.
If we view each choice as the project itself,
then the timing decision is between a set
of mutually exclusive projects.

We can launch the project only once.

Several factors can influence the cash flow forecasts
and the timing decision.
For example, the demand for the product may increase over time.
In addition, launching it early will also
cause your competitors to catch up sooner.
Let's assume the opportunity cost of capital for the project
is 10%.
We can compute the NPV for each launching date
at the time of launch.
We denote this by FPV, the project's future present value.
The numbers are reported in the table.
If launched in year one, the NPV then is $100 million.
If instead launched in year two, three, and four,
the FPV will be $120, $138, and $149 million
respectively as shown by row two to five in the table.
Clearly, by waiting, the FPV increases.
But how long should we wait?
There are two ways to resolve this.
First, we can consider the rate of return by waiting.
If we wait until year two, the value appreciates by 20%
as shown in the third column of the table.
If we wait longer, the return will be 15% and 8%
respectively.
Are these good returns?
Well, keep in mind that by waiting,
we are holding the project as an asset with its risks.
We also know the cost of capital is
10%, which is the return on similar assets in the market.
Therefore, waiting is desirable only
if it yields a return higher than the cost of capital.
Column three shows that the return from waiting
is higher than 10% until year three,
while waiting from year three to year four is only 8%
lower than the cost of capital.
This gives us the optimal time to launch the project, which
is year three.

Second, we can also compare by discounting
the FPV of different options back
to year zero at the cost of capital of 10%.
That is, to compare the NPV now.
Column four gives the numbers.
Clearly, launching in year three gives the highest NPV today.
Other than being mutually exclusive,
projects can be dependent in other ways, such as sequential.
That is, project B is contingent on project A.
For example, selling advertisement
through a social network is contingent on building
the network first.
Such a dependence is what we called strategic options
earlier.
We will return to this topic later in part two
after developing a better understanding
on options and effective tools to value them.