PROFESSOR: So our objective in this class
is to get a better understanding of the components
of shareholders' equity.
So we've seen a lot of these already.
So some of this is going to be review.
But we're going to also introduce some wrinkles,
a little bit of new material.
So shareholders' equity consists of contributing capital.
So when we buy--
when we sell stock to people, that's contributed capital.
Sometimes, companies buy their stock back.
That's called treasury stock.
And we're going to look at how the financial statements
reflect a variety of corporate equity transactions.
So we'll start by looking at stock offerings, how
you account for a sale of stock to the public.
Something called stock splits--
we'll talk about that.
We'll talk about, again, stock repurchases
when companies buy back their shares.
We're going to talk a little bit about using stock and options.
Options are a form of stock compensation.
So how firms use stock compensation
and how we do the accounting for that.
And then we're also going to talk about what
are called hybrid securities.
So debt that converts into stock or preferred stock that
converts into stock That's called convertible debt
and convertible preferred.
Those securities are hybrids because they
look like debt in some ways, but they can turn into equity.
Here's a picture or a flowchart of shareholders' equity.
So if we start on the far right column here--
notice that we've already talked about other comprehensive
income and we saw that with available for sale securities,
there's going to be an accumulation
of other comprehensive income related
to those available for sale securities.
We've talked throughout the course about retained earnings.
We've talked throughout the course
about contributed capital.
We're going to introduce the accounting in a few minutes
for treasury stock.
And then we're going to break contributed capital down into--
some contributed capital comes from common stock.
Some firms will issue a form of stock called preferred stock.
We'll talk about that later.
And then we'll talk about how each
of these forms of contributed capital
have both a par value and then the acronym APIC, which is
the additional paid in capital.
So we're going to do some examples of that
on the next slides.
