PROFESSOR: So the next slide, we're
going to start talking about common stock, how it's divided
into par value, and how it's divided into APIC,
or additional paid in capital.
So as we talked about before, common stock
is the basic residual ownership share in the corporation.
So our balance sheet equation is assets minus liabilities
equals stockholders' equity.
And we've talked about before how
that means that if the firm is liquidated,
the assets will be sold.
First, the liability holders will get their payments.
And then if there's anything left over,
the residual amounts--
and residual here means the amount left over.
The residual value after we paid off
all the liabilities, all the debt, all the preferred stock.
Then the common stock will get any value left over.
So that's one thing that distinguishes common stock.
The other thing that distinguishes common stock
is, remember, the common stockholders
own the corporation.
And because they own the corporation,
they get votes on certain corporate issues.
So if the company is going to be sold to another company,
for example, the common stockholders
will vote on whether they think the payment in that merger
and acquisition is appropriate.
So that's background on common stock.
So again, from the prior slide, common stock's
divided into something called par value.
And then what's left over after par value
is something else, called additional
paid in capital or APIC.
And then par value is the stated value
on the face of the security.
And what it is--
and then some companies have no par value.
So there's some companies out there with no par value stock.
Other companies that have a dollar par
value or a thousandth of $1 par value.
So par value, 50 years ago, used to mean something, OK?
And then the fact that it's around now,
it's just sort of like a historical artifact.
It doesn't really mean anything now.
So just take the par value as given,
and use it to record stock transactions,
as we'll do an example of here in just a minute.
And then additional paid in capital, or APIC,
is just the difference between if we sell stock,
we raise some money.
First, we're going to assign some of that value
to par value.
And then everything left over is going
to go to additional paid in capital.
And we'll see some examples of this starting with this.
So here's AT&T's 2019 10-K again,
and I've blown up here the stockholders' equity section.
So it is required that a company tells you
in their stockholders' equity section what
their par value is.
Here, you can see that AT&T has $1 par value.
And it's also required that the company tells you
how many shares they have issued.
So AT&T has issued 7.6 billion shares,
or 7,621 million shares.
So if we take that dollar par value times
the 7.6 billion shares issued, common stock on their balance
sheet, which is the third box there, of 7,621 million.
That's how they come up with a common stock value.
Also on the face of the balance sheet,
companies are required to tell you how much common stock
they're authorized to issue.
So in AT&T's case, they're authorized
to issue 14 billion shares.
We've already seen a minute ago that they've actually
issued 7.6 billion shares.
And then we'll talk in a minute about Treasury
stock, which is they've got Treasury stock, or stock
that they've repurchased over time, of 0.4 billion shares.

Continuing our example, we see that AT&T has authorized
shares of 14 billion shares.
This is the number of shares that shareholders
have given permission for AT&T to sell or issue.
Not all of these will be issued.
We've seen that AT&T has sold or issued
about 7.6 billion shares.
Thus the issued shares are always going to be less than
or equal to authorized shares.
And they're usually going to be shares that
are authorized, but not issued.
So in this case, AT&T has about 6.4 billion shares,
which is the difference between their 14 billion shares
authorized and their 7.6 billion shares issued.
And these extra 6.4 billion shares, AT&T
can issue in secondary offerings or in acquisitions like this
without much oversight by shareholders.
Finally, what we're going to be most interested in
are outstanding shares.
Outstanding shares are the shares that can actually vote.
Outstanding shares are also what we're
going to use to compute the market value of equity,
which is shares outstanding times the current share price.
Outstanding shares are the number
of shares that are actually owned by stockholders,
and to get to those, we're going to take
our issued shares of 7.6 billion and then subtract off
the number of shares held in Treasury.
So AT&T has got about 7.2 billion shares outstanding,
which is, again, the 7.6 billion shares that
are issued minus the 0.4 billion shares that are in Treasury.
So finally, notice that shares outstanding or outstanding
shares is always going to be less than
or equal to issued shares, is always going to be less than
or equal to authorized shares.
And what you can see here, going back for a second,
you can collect a lot of important information
relative to corporate governance just off
of the face of the balance sheet like this.
