PROFESSOR: So back to our flowchart
of shareholders' equity--
the bottom left column there, we just talked about common stock
and how common stock is divided into par value
and an additional paid-in capital.
In this segment, we're going to talk about treasury stock.
And treasury stock has been in the press a lot lately.
So treasury stock is stock that's
been repurchased by the company.
So instead of keeping cash on their balance sheet
or instead of paying a dividend, companies
will repurchase their shares so from a corporate finance
perspective, why do companies repurchase their shares?
So one good reason is that this is a way
to return cash to shareholders.
And it can be a tax efficient way of returning cash
as an alternative to dividends.
The intuition here is if I pay shareholders a dividend,
everybody gets a dividend whether they want it or not.
And they all have to pay tax on it.
When I repurchase stock, only people that
want to sell the stock, sell the stock.
Everybody else keeps the stock.
So the people that keep the stock,
they don't pay any tax at that point.
And the people that sell the stock, well maybe they
wanted to sell the stock anyway.
So from a corporate finance perspective,
repurchases are a tax advantage way
to return cash to shareholders.
Also some option plan-- so we give options to employees.
And we'll talk about this a little bit more later.
And those options are new shares, ordinarily.
But some companies or some shareholder groups
want the companies to control the amount of shares that
are given out in option plans.
And they require those companies that they can only
give shares and option plans if those shares have
been repurchased.
So that way option shares are not creating new shares.
They're just coming out of share repurchases.
And we'll talk about it later--
repurchases may increase earnings per share.
So particularly, as in right now,
when the yield on corporate cash is basically zero--
so you got a lot of cash sitting on your balance sheet.
It has no earnings.
So if you repurchase stock, it doesn't affect your income,
which is your earnings.
But it lowers your share count.
So it'll cause your earnings per share to go up.
So in certain environments, repurchases
can increase earnings per share.
And then finally, I'm a little skeptical about this.
But managers will always think their stock is undervalued.
So if you think your stock is undervalued,
it's a good use of corporate resources to buy stock back.
Because you're buying that stock back.
And you're in some sense, increasing
the value of the remaining stock, because the stock is
undervalued.
Now the accounting treatment, which is
what we're interested in here.
So I just gave you some intuition
for why this is done--
is the stock repurchase is going to be a use of cash.
And it's going to be a reduction in shareholders' equity.
So in no sense is treasury stock an asset.

So we'll see here, so AT&T repurchased about 67
million shares during 2019.
And it paid about $2.4 billion for those shares.
So when it did the repurchases, cash went down.
And then we have a new stockholders' equity account
here, which is treasury stock.
Notice the XE there.
That means that it's contra equity account.
So it's a reduction in equity.
So when we buy back treasury stock,
it reduces cash and also reduces stockholders' equity
through this contra equity account.

And we can see this also on the cash flow statement.
So this is AT&T's 2019 cash flow from financing.
So a line item on their cash flow from financing
shows that they spent $2.4 billion in cash.
So they use $2.4 billion in cash to repurchase stock.
Also on their balance sheet, and we saw this earlier,
there'll be a line item for this contra equity account.
Notice that the treasury stock is a negative amount.
So it's a contra equity.
So it reduces equity.
And it tells us that AT&T had about $8.4 billion shares
in treasury at the end of 2019.
And then the cost of those shares was $13 billion.
So over time, AT&T, as of the end of 2019,
had bought back $13 billion worth of their shares.
The final place you can see this going on
in the financial statements is in the changes
in the stockholders' equity account.
So AT&T shows that at the beginning of the year,
we had $12 billion in treasury.
So that's the right-hand column in their balance sheet.
So at the beginning of the year, we had $12 billion in treasury.
We repurchased and acquired $2 1/2 billion in stock--
$2.4 billion in repurchases and $75 million
in other stock acquisitions.
And then AT&T-- in the line below that, AT&T
is probably a company that uses treasury stock or stock
compensation.
So we reissued $1.4 billion worth of stock.
So overall at the end of the year, we had $13 billion
of stock in treasury.
Again the accounting for this--
once we got treasury stock, it can leave our balance sheet
in two ways.
So it can be reissued as we just saw AT&T do.
Often it's reissued as part of stock compensation plans,
or it can be retired.
So we can just get rid of it.
So we're going to focus on one treasury stock is reissued.
As we see here with AT&T, when they reissued
that stock, $1.466 billion--
the treasury stock contra equity account is reduced.
And then the chances are, the price we repurchase it at
and the price that we reissued it
that are going to be different.
So the difference in price--
we just take that difference, aggregate it, and add it
to additional paid-in capital.
Now very rarely, companies will retire treasury stocks.
So this is not on the exam.
When they retire it, obviously the treasury stock account
is going to be reduced with the amount of retirements.
And then depending on how it is retired,
we might reduce par value.
We might reduce the APIC.
And we might reduce retained earnings as well.
Now cash dividends-- let's imagine a firm has
1,000 shares outstanding.
And it pays a dividend of $2 a share
or declares a dividend of $2 a share.
So at the time we declare the dividend, dividends payable,
which is a liability, that goes up by $2 a share
times 1,000 shares outstanding.
And retained earnings but not net income, remember.
So retained earnings is going to be reduced
by the amount of the dividend.
Later in time, we'll actually pay the dividend.
And at that point, the cash will go down.
Dividends payable will go away.
So institutionally, we're going to declare a dividend.
And we're going to pay the dividend some time later.
And the reason for that is remember,
our stock is trading all the time.
So it's hard to know exactly who our shareholders are
at any point in time.
So after we declare a dividend, we do some work.
We figure out who is actually eligible to receive
that dividend, because they're stockholders at the time.
And then we send the dividend checks to those people.
That's the point at which cash goes down
and dividends payable goes away.
And so you can also see this on firms' cash flow
from financing in their cash flow statement.
So an AT&T's case, they paid $14 billion or $15 billion
worth of dividends in 2019, which is quite a bit larger
than the amount, the $2.4 billion
they spent on repurchasing treasury stock.
So AT&T is a big dividend payer.
They've got shareholders who historically,
are interested in getting a dividend from AT&T every year.
So AT&T is paying big amounts of dividends,
as you can see from their cash flow from financing statement.