
PROFESSOR: So now we're going to talk about stock splits.
This is kind of a specialty topic.
But those of you that go into research,
you're going to see that stock splits
can cause a lot of problems.
So we're going to talk about the accounting for stock splits.
So companies sometimes are going to split their shares.
So if we do a two for one split, that
means that everybody that owns one share will
get another share.
And they'll own two shares.
So what happens then is the number of shares outstanding
will double.
Par value will fall by 50%.
And the price per share will also fall by 50%.
So in our example here, Sloan Company
has 1,000 shares outstanding.
They have a dollar par value.
And the price at the time of the split is $120.
So if the company does a two for one split, what happens?
How many shares will they have outstanding after the split?
So the number of shares will double.
So shares outstanding will go from 1,000 to 2,000.
What will happen to their dollar par value?
So that will be cut in half or divided by 2.
So the par value is going to be $0.50,
which is the dollar par value before the split divided
by the split of two shares.
And then finally, what's going to happen to the stock price?
So the stock price was $120.
It's going to be divided by 2 as well.
So the stock price is going to go to $60, which
is $120 divided by 2.
Now, notice here from an economic perspective,
nothing happened.
Before the split, we had 1,000 shares outstanding.
They were worth $120 a share.
So the company had a market value of $120,000.
After the split, we have 2,000 shares outstanding.
They're only worth $60 a share.
2,000 times 60 is also $120,000.
So company value in total hasn't changed.
So it's an economic--
it's a nonissue in some sense.
So if it's a nonissue, why do investors and management
view stock splits positively?
Well, historically, by splitting your stock,
if you got a stock price of $120 in this example,
people might look at it, retail buyers which are just
small people like me and you.
Retail buyers might look at the stock price
and say $120 is too much.
After we split the stock, the same buyers
might say, oh, $60 is much more in my price range.
So it can create the perception of a more affordable price.
It may be signaling from management.
So if management expects the stock price
to keep going up and up, then it might make sense
to split the stock.
So it could be a signal from management that we expect--
management expects the stock price to keep going up and up.
And then finally, this is an important point here.
If you're a poorly performing company,
your stock price is going down and down,
it falls under $1, that's at the point
that you become a penny stock so to speak.
And that's important because a lot
of stock exchanges like the New York Stock Exchange
will delist you if your price falls below $1.
So in this example recently Aurora Cannabis,
which is a New York Stock Exchange company,
it did a reverse split.
So it says at the top there we're
going to do a reverse split, one for 12 reverse split.
I'm going to round these numbers just
to make the algebra a little easy.
So right now the company's got 1.2 billion shares outstanding.
If we do a one for 12 reverse split,
we'll have about 100 million shares outstanding.
So a reverse split, instead of making more shares,
you're making fewer shares.
And the key to this is that the time
of the split, Aurora Cannabis had a share price of $0.71.
If we split-- if we reverse split that-- excuse me--
one for 12, $0.71 is going to turn into about $8.50 split.
And again, the reason this is important
is because New York Stock Exchange, which
is thought to be probably the best stock
exchange in the United States, to be on the New York Stock
Exchange, the stock price has to be at least $1 a share.
If you trade below $1 share for 30 days consecutively,
the New York Stock Exchange will delist
you, which means you'll no longer be on the New York Stock
Exchange.
It will be harder for people to trade your stock.
And it'll be really bad for--
it's really bad for a company's stock if it's delisted.
So we're going to do a reverse stock split--
or Aurora Cannabis in this example
is doing a reverse stock split--
to avoid being delisted by the New York Stock Exchange.
Now, this is a sort of specialty thing.
You don't see that many reverse splits
except for cases like this when the company's really
doing poorly.
A more common occurrence is a retail stock like Starbucks.
So everybody knows what Starbucks is.
It's the coffee company.
Lots of retail investors own Starbucks.
So Starbucks over its history has split two
for one six different times.
So the most recent time it split two for one was back in 2015.
And at that time, Starbucks had 1.5 billion shares outstanding.
After the split, it had 1.5 billion shares outstanding.
So how many shares did it have outstanding immediately
before the split?
Well, it had half as many outstanding.
So it's a two for one split.
So to figure out how many outstanding before the split,
we'll take 1,501 divided by 2 so about 750 million.
If the price was about $48 immediately after the split,
what was the price immediately before the split?
So again, take $47.96.
Multiply by 2.
It was about $96 a share.
So here, you can sort of see the intuition
for why Starbucks as a retail stock, maybe $95
seems too high a stock price for their retail stock buyers.
We split the stock.
Now the price is $48 a share.
It seems more affordable.
So the reason this is important, stock splits are important,
those of you that are going to go into research,
is shown by the following example from Starbucks.
So Starbucks went public back in 1992.
So its IPO was June 26, 1992.
And at close of trading on that first day,
Starbucks stock price was $21.50.
So if we do a naive calculation of total return
through December 31, 2019, when Starbucks price was $88,
it looks like Starbucks has basically
tripled in price since then or quadrupled in price since then.
So we have a 300% return since 1992.
And that seems like a big amount of money.
But notice that the S&P 500 during that time is up 700%.
So the S&P 500 has gone up by a factor of seven
whereas Starbucks by this calculation
has only gone up by a factor of 3.
So what's wrong with this calculation
is it misses the fact that Starbucks stock has split two
for one six times.
So that means that you had a share of stock, at the IPO,
if you had one share stock, it turned into two shares.
Then it turned into four shares, et cetera, et cetera.
But now if you bought one share of the IPO,
you've got 64 shares now.
So the right way to do the calculation is
you got to go back in time and split
adjust the first day close.
So the first day close apples to apples with prices now,
you take the first close of $21.50 divided by the split
factor of 64.
So basically, Starbucks came public at $0.34 a share
based on today's stock price.
Then if we do the correct calculation of the total return
to somebody that bought stock on the first day close,
we'll take the $88 price today divided by $0.34.
Subtract off one.
So that's a total return of 26,000%.
So you made 26 times your money in Starbucks.
So Starbucks is a top performer.
It's one of the best performers in the S&P 500.
And notice that is beating the daylights out of the S&P 500
in general.
So why this is important, again, is data providers.
You have to as a researcher understand
how data providers are accounting for stock splits.
And the reason this is important is
that there are certain types of firms that tend to split a lot.
They're companies like Starbucks that are top performers.
So a bad performer like we looked
at earlier, Aurora Cannabis, it's not going to be doing
splits.
Or it might be doing reverse splits,
but it's not increasing its shares.
And if you fail to account for these splits,
you're going to do an improper calculation.
And you're going to understate the return performance
of your top performers.
So in most databases that researchers
use such as the Center for Research and Stock
Prices or CRSP, prices given are historical prices.
So you go on CRSP.
You'll find that Starbucks' closing price as of June 26,
1992, was $21.50 a share.
But in a separate column, CRSP is
going to give you a split factor of 64.
So the total adjustment factors we saw a minute ago is 64.
And so if you understand the structure,
it's easy to compute the split-adjusted price of $0.34.
And it's easy to correctly compute
the total return for Starbucks.
And this is just something to be careful about.
So you want to really be careful when they're
splits are involved because not all databases are going
to adjust in the same way.
And if you don't do the adjustments correctly,
you'll look at a top performer like Starbucks
that looks like it's not performing very well.
And a 25,000% return as Starbucks
got, that's going to drive a lot of performance evaluation.
If you turn that into a 300% return, it's just wrong.
You're going to get the wrong result.
And this has caused some pretty famous academics
to publish papers that are just wrong because they haven't done
the split adjustment correctly.