
INSTRUCTOR: So now I want to talk a little bit
about other types of equity.
We're going to talk some about stock compensation,
stock options, and restricted stock.
We're going to talk just a little bit about preferred
stock.
And then we're going to talk a bit also
about hybrid securities, which are
convertible debt and convertible preferred stock.
So when we talked about cash flow,
we talked about stock compensation.
And the key thing is the line at the bottom there.
When we give an employee stock, we're
going to increase contributed capital.
And then we're going to have a wage expense.
And then we talked about the idea
that if you pay somebody in stock,
it's very similar to selling some stock to an outsider
and then pay the employee in cash.
I want to just give you one wrinkle
on this, which is vesting.
So I gave you $1,000 worth of stock.
And it's going to vest over three years.
What that means is that if you're still
with the company a year from now,
you'll get 1/3 of the stock.
If you're still with the company two years from now,
you'll get another 1/3.
And if you're still with a company in three years,
you get the remaining 1/3.
So you've got to remain at the company for three years
to get that full $1,000.
So if you leave, if you're the employee
and you leave before the stock vests,
you're going to forfeit or give up that stock.

So the way the accounting system works on this,
I give somebody $1,000 worth of stock.
But there's three years' worth of vesting.
So by the matching principle, we're
going to divide the expense of $1,000 in total
and make that a $333 expense per year.
Because we're trying to match the expense to the value
that I'm getting out of you, which
takes place over a three-year period.
In terms of the balance sheet equation,
basically what's going to happen,
in the first year when you vest in $333 worth of stock,
contributed capital is going to go up by $333.
We're going to have wage expense of $333.
Similarly in the second year, and then
similarly in the third year.
So vesting is a way for companies
to keep their employees.
So the employee has to stay for three years
to get all their stock.
But it's also a technique that companies use
to spread stock compensation.
So I'm giving you stock right now,
but I'm spreading the expense of that stock
over a three-year period.
Because I'm vesting it over that three-year period.
And then notice that if we vest like this
and we grant every year stock compensation for a given year,
it's going to have some expense for this year,
some expense for last year, and then some expense for the year
before that.
Remember, we saw a similar example
of this when we were calculating software amortization
expense in our discussion of intangible assets.
And then companies that give out stock or equity,
like Tesla, are required to have disclosure
in their 10-K for how much stock that they gain.
So this disclosure is for Tesla's option
and compensation.
It shows you how many options they had outstanding
at the start of the year.
It shows you that they granted an additional 1.1 million
options.
Employees exercised options for about 2 million shares.
And then the options that are canceled
are probably because the employees left and they weren't
fully vested in those options.
So what this tells us is that, again, Tesla
granted about 1.2 million options.
The average exercise price of those options was about $310.
And typically, stock options give employees
the right to buy, in this case, Tesla stock
at a price of $310 for the next 10 years.
Because Tesla in particular is going up very rapidly.
What it tells you is that 10 years from now,
Tesla stock price is probably going to be way above $310.
And employees, at that point, can
exercise their stock options.
They can pay $310 a share for stock that's worth
maybe $1,000 a share right now.
Also in the 10-K--
and this is not on the exam, but just so that you understand
the disclosure a little bit--
the company is going to value those options.
And they're going to value based on something called the Black
Scholes model, which you're going to learn about
in your finance classes.
For the Black Scholes value of those options that it shows
there is $122.
So even though the exercise price
is $300, the options themselves, Tesla values them at $122.
So if Tesla gave out 1.2 million options
as they did this year, and the options each
have a value of $122, the value of the options granted
was $142 million.
And then again, back to vesting provisions.
So in 2017, this is just an example of vesting provisions,
Tesla granted a huge number, $1.1 billion
worth of stock and options to its employees.
So if Tesla is using a three-year vesting
period, which is probably close to what they're doing,
the expense in 2017 of this grant
is going to be $1.1 billion divided by a three-year vesting
period, or about $0.4 billion a year.
And again, Tesla probably granting options every year.
So this year's stock compensation expense
will have something to do with this year's option grant,
something to do with last year's option grant,
and also something to do with the year before option grant
as well.