
PROFESSOR: So now just briefly, I
want to talk to you about the other part of stockholder's
equity.
So we've got common stock, and we also have preferred stocks.
The preferred stock is a term for a class of stock.
There's lots of different flavors of preferred stock.
Preferred stock-- the word preferred
means that preferred stock gets liquidation preference
over common stock in bankruptcy.
So again, as we talked about before,
if a company liquidates, it's going
to sell off all its assets.
It's going to pay off its liabilities.
It's going to then pay off its preferred stock if it has any.
And only then does common stock get any kind
of payoff in bankruptcy.
So preferred stock often looks kind of like debt
because it has different rights and preferences
to common stock.
These preferences, or what the preferred features are,
may include a dividend.
So preferred stocks typically have a dividend.
So that makes it like debt.
So if it's $100 preferred, it might have a $5 dividend,
so a 5% dividend.
And those dividends are specified
when the stock is issued.
And typically, your right to that dividend--
because your preferred security, you
get your dividend before the common stock gets any dividend.
Dividends may be cumulative.
What that means if for some reason
the company doesn't pay a preferred dividend one year,
the next year it has to pay that past preferred dividend
any other preferred dividends before common stockholders
can get dividends.
And then while we're talking about this in particular right
now, is preferred stock is often convertible,
which means that you can turn your preferred stock
into common stock at some exchange rate.

And in particular, those of you that
are interested in IPO companies, venture capitalists often
use convertible preferred stock as their funding vehicles
before the IPO.
So venture capital will give money to an pre-IPO company,
but it will give it in the form of a convertible preferred.
And the reason the venture capital
likes to do that is because it can force the company
to pay it a dividend.
You can't really pay a dividend on common stock pre-IPO.
And then having gotten all the dividends, when
the company, if it comes public and does an IPO,
then the venture capitalists at that point
turn their convertible preferred stock
into regular common stock.
So this is a very frequent funding vehicle
for pre-IPO companies used by venture capitalists.