PROFESSOR: And then that brings us
to the topic of hybrid security.
So hybrid just means that the security has
an aspect of a liability, and it also
has an aspect of an equity.
So you got convertible debt.
Well, in certain situations that we'll talk about,
it looks like debt.
But in other situations it'll turn into common stock.
Convertible preferred stock, what we just talked about.
In certain situations that looks like preferred stock.
So it gets a big preferred dividend.
But at some point, it's going to convert and turn
into common stock.
So if the convertible debt or the convertible preferred
is converted, it becomes stock.
If not, it's just like regular debt or regular preferred.
So why do companies issue convertible debt
and convertible preferred?
So one general reason is by giving the conversion feature
out, you get a reduced interest rate on the debt,
if it's a convertible debt.
And you're giving your bond holders the option
to buy equity in the future.
They value that option.
So they'll give you a reduced rate on debt.
And so lots of tech companies-- this is a Wall Street Journal
article from 2018--
lots of publicly-traded technology companies
have been issuing convertible debt.
And the pace that they are doing this--
remember, we're in a high valuation situation right now.
And this is the biggest high valuation situation
we've seen since the dot-com bubble.
And the reason that companies are
doing this is the cost of the debt is very low.
So convertible debt only cost 2 and 1/2% two years ago,
but the tech companies are only paying 1%.
So by giving up an option on their future equity,
they're getting super low interest rates on their debt.
So it's a way for them to issue debt
at a very low cost of capital.
So to make this a little clearer, let's do an example.
So this is a pretend company, ABC Company.
It issues $100 million convertible bond
or convertible debt.
We're sitting in 2015.
The bond issue matures in five years, in 2020.
So the convertible bond has an interest rate, or coupon,
of 2%.
Had ABC issued straight debt--
so debt without any conversion feature--
the cost of that straight debt would have been 5% coupon rate.
So by adding the conversion feature,
ABC is saving 3% in interest expense, cash.
And that's the difference between the 5%
they would have paid on straight debt minus the 2%
that they're paid on this convertible.
So, again, bond owners like the conversion option.
So bondholders take the conversion option.
And in return, they'll give the company
a lower rate on its debt.
When ABC issued the bonds, the stock price was at $80 a share,
and the bonds converted a conversion price
of $100 a share, or 25% above the current price.
So this is going to vary depending on the issue,
but it's typical that the conversion
price is about 25% or 30% greater than the current price.
So if these bonds converted, they
would turn into an additional 1 million shares.
So this example just makes the math simple.
So $100 million of debt divided by $100 per share conversion
price--
that tells you that these bonds turn into an additional 1
million shares.
Now let's think about what would happen at maturity.
So maturity is 2020.
What would the stockholders do if the stock price at that time
is less than $100?
So if the stock price is less than $100,
those million shares times a price less than $100
are going to be less than $100 million.
And the debt holders had their choice
of either getting cash of $100 million
or stock that's worth less than $100 million.
So clearly, they're going to take the cash.
And the convertible debt ends up being regular debt.
So it has to be paid off in cash like regular debt is.
Now, on the other hand, what happens if the stock
price is above $100?
So in that case, we can turn the bonds into shares.
And those million shares will be worth more than $100 million.
So we're smart bondholders.
We're going to take the shares, and those million shares
are going to be worth up more than $100 million.
So in that case, the debt has turned into equity.
So depending on where the stock price is at maturity,
convertible debt can be either like debt
or it can be like equity.
In terms of accounting for this, if the stock price
is less than $100, it's debt.
And the company is going to have to come up with $100 million
in cash and the convertible debt is going
to drop off our balance sheet.
So that's a disadvantage, the convertible debt,
because if you're a tech-y company,
you may not have a lot of cash.
But all of a sudden at maturity, because your stock price
doesn't perform very well, you've
got to come up with $100 million worth of cash.
On the other hand, if your stock has done well
and it's above $100, you're not going to pay out any cash.
The convertible debt is going to go away.
And then to balance the balance sheet equation,
we'll take the $100 million of convertible debt
and turn it into stock and put that $100 million
into contributed capital.
So in this case, we don't have to pay out
any cash, which is great.
Contributed capital goes up by $100 million.
The disadvantage here is that, notice, the shares outstanding
does increase by a million shares.
Now in terms of accounting for the convertible debt at issue--
and this is specialized, so it's not on the exam.
But we're going to come back and look at this in Tesla
at the very end of the course.
So there are two ways to do it.
So we just argued that convertible debt--
it's kind of like a liability, and it's
kind of like an equity.
So it makes sense, in some sense, when you actually
stuff to put some value in debt and put some value in equity.
And that's what's done in IFRS.
It's also done in the US, in very specialized cases.
And we'll see an example of this when we look
at Tesla, again, at the end of the course.
And the way to account for this is we're
going to value the liability first and then
assign the rest of the value to the equity.
So we'll just do what we did in the bond class--
is value of the bond as if it's a discount bond.
Notice that it has a 2% cash coupon,
but we've got 5% interest rate in the marketplace.
So the bond is issued at a discount.
That's going to be less than the face value of the bond.
We'll take the excess of the face amount
over the discount bond and we're going
to assign that to equity, which is conversion value, which
will be added to contributed capital.
So, to me, what IFRS is doing here
makes a lot of sense because, again, the convertible debt--
it kind of looks like debt.
It kind of looks like equity.
So when we issue it, we're going to put
some of the value in debt and put
some of the value in equity.
But this is clearly complicated.
So what the FASB does in the US is just do a single liability.
So we're just going to-- we issued $100 million
worth of debt.
We're going to put $100 million worth of debt on our balance
sheet.
We are not going to do anything to contributed capital.
And in fact, sometimes the FASB really
just kills me because they're just heading
in the wrong direction here.
So this is a lot simpler, but they're
going to require that all convertible debt be
just assigned as if it were a liability.
So they're forgetting the fact that, again,
with convertible debt-- it's got features of a liability
and it's got features of equity.

And then, in practice-- again, this is not on the exam--
but in practice, you can tell from a context
how the company accounts for the convertible debt.
So in the US, it typically is done as a single liability.
But you'll also see in special cases,
as in Tesla, they are actually splitting it
into a debt component and an equity component.