
PROFESSOR: So now we're going to talk about earnings
per share or EPS.
So just briefly, as motivation, obviously investors
care about price per share.
So they're going to also care about earnings per share.
As an economic rationale, the price to EPS ratio,
which you'll see in the press talked a lot about as a PE
ratio, is a shorthand valuation metric.
So how big is the stock price relative to earnings per share.
And if you remember our discussions in Shrek 2,
this can be motivated, as well, by discounted cash flow
analysis.
So if earnings are constant and cash flows are constant,
it makes sense that the price is going
to be a constant multiple of cash flow
and therefore, earnings.
So we'll just take as a given the fact that investors
are really interested in the price earnings ratio
and therefore, in earnings per share.
So there's two flavors of earnings per share.
There's basic earnings per share,
which is net income available to common shareholders--
we'll define that term in just a second--
divided by average shares, outstanding.
The second, more complicated measure
is diluted earnings per share, which
we're going to adjust the numerator for any interest
expense on converts or any preferred dividends.
And then we're going to adjust the denominator for options
outstanding and convertible debt and preferred outstanding.
So this gets at the intuition, which
is earnings are not only for common stockholders,
but they're are also part of earnings go to option holders.
Part of earnings also go to convertible.
So diluted earnings per share is sort
of getting at the sharing of earnings between stock options
and convertibles.
And as we'll see in a second, diluted earnings per share
will be the same as basic earnings per share
if the calculation results in diluted earnings per share
being bigger than basic earnings per share.
And the reason that this happens often
is if you have negative income.
Diluted shares are going to be bigger than basic shares.
So if you compute diluted EPS for a firm
with negative income, it would be bigger than basic EPS.
But it's been decided that it's always
going to be the case that if basic EPS is smaller
than diluted EPS, then we're going
to set diluted EPS equal to basic EPS.

And both of them appear at the bottom of the income statement,
as we'll see in this example from Twitter.
So this is Twitter's 2018 income statement.
You see they've got net income in 2018 of about 1.2 billion,
they've got basic earnings per share of $1.60.
And they got diluted earnings per share of $1.56.
Then if you look in 2017--
and the same thing goes on in 2016--
those years, Twitter had a loss.
So basic earnings per share and diluted earnings per share
are going to be the same thing.
So diluted earnings per share will be reported as the same
as basic earnings per share.