PROFESSOR: Now for diluted EPS, we're
going to take net income available
to common shareholders in the denominator.
And we're going to add things back.
And then in terms of shares outstanding,
we're going to take weighted average shares outstanding
and add to that average diluted shares outstanding.
So again, net income available to common shareholders
is net income minus net income of attributable noncontrolling
interest minus preferred dividends.
We're going to add back convertible preferred dividends
and aftertax convertible debt interest.
So if there are any convertibles outstanding,
what we're going to do is pretend that they convert.
And so once they convert, we'll no longer
have a convertible preferred dividend.
We'll no longer have debt interest.
Remember, debt is tax deductible.
Convertible preferred dividends are not.
So we're just going to add back after-tax interest,
and then we're going to divide that by diluted shares.
And the diluted shares are stock options
that are assumed to convert and convertible securities
that are assumed convert.
And we're going to do two examples.
First, we're going to look at convertible securities.
So let's just pretend, in addition
to our calculations above for basic EPS,
let's pretend that the $200,000 preferred dividend comes
from a convertible preferred stock,
and then let's pretend that this convertible can be converted
into 150,000 shares of stock.
So diluted shares for convertibles, the accounting
term is if converted.
So we basically assume that at the start of the year,
the convertible converted into stock.
So therefore, there's no dividends
or no interest on that convert.
So in this case, if that convert converted
to the start of the year, we would add to basic shares
outstanding 150,000 diluted shares associated
with the convertible.
So our average shares outstanding
would go up to 639,000 diluted shares,
and then we compute diluted EPS as the sum
of net income available to common
plus the preferred dividend divided by diluted shares
outstanding.
And that gives us a diluted EPS number of $1.88.
So diluted EPS is always going to be less than
or equal to basic EPS.
Now let's look at options.
And just to keep things simple, let's
pretend that we don't have that convert after all,
but we have some options outstanding.
And in fact, over the course of the year,
average options outstanding were 25,000.
They had an exercise price at $20.
And the average market price associated with those options
was $50.

So here, we're going to use something
in accounting terms called the treasury stock method.
So these options are in the money,
which means that the market price per share of $50
is greater than the exercise price per share.
And so the treasury stock method means
that we're going to pretend that the option was exercised,
and then we're going to use the proceeds from the exercise
to repurchase stock.
And the diluted shares associated with those options
are equal to the number of options
minus the deemed or assumed amount of repurchases.
So let's continue our example.
Here's the treasury stock method.
So if these 25,000 shares options
were exercised at an exercise price of $20,
then when the options are exercised,
the firm would get $500,000.
Second step is we're going to pretend that the firm takes
that $500,000 and uses it to repurchase shares at $50
a share so it could repurchase 10,000 shares.
So the net effect of the options will be 25,000 more shares.
But we're going to repurchase 10,000 of those shares.
So net new shares would be 15,000.
We add those to the basic shares outstanding and come up
with 504,000 shares outstanding, and then
that gives our diluted EPS, which again
is net income available to common shareholders divided
by diluted shares outstanding.
So that gives us $1.98.
Then looking again at Twitter, so
in their financial statements, they'll
show you the basic EPS computation, which
is at the top of this table.
And then they'll show you the diluted EPS computation, which
is the bottom of the table.
So again, their net income for 2020 was a billion 2.
They had 754 million shares outstanding,
basic shares, average shares outstanding, basic shares.
That gives us basic net income per share of $1.60.
Next comes the diluted EPS calculation.
So the numerator, which is net income, because Twitter
has no converts outstanding, numerator's
going to be the same for basic and for diluted EPS.
And to compute diluted shares, we
take basic shares of 750,000, add shares associated
with restricted stock, add shares associated
with stock options, add other diluted shares outstanding.
So that gives us a bigger number diluted shares
than the basic shares.
And so diluted net income is $1.56 versus basic net income
of $1.60.
And, again, when there's a net loss,
we assume there's no change in diluted shares.
So that's why you got those dashes
under affects the diluted securities in 2017 and 2018.
Because we're not computing any diluted shares in those years,
net loss per share basic is the same
as net loss per share diluted.
So in summary and in takeaways, we've
talked a lot about stockholders' equity.
We talked in particular about transactions
that can affect stockholders' equity.
So first of all, we talked about stock issuances.
Then we talked about repurchases.
We talked about stock splits.
We talked about dividends.
We talked a little bit about stock compensation,
basically vesting provisions and how
that affects the expense of stock compensation,
and then we talked about convertible debt
and convertible preferred.
Now, a growing company like a Twitter,
a growing company like a Tesla, are always
going to be looking to raise cash.
And they're going to raise that cash in different ways
depending on market circumstances
and economic realities.
So a serial issuer like Tesla has lots of stuff going on.
But you can use their financial statements.
And we're going to do this in the last class.
We can use their financial statement, the cash flow
statement in particular and the balance sheet,
to see what they're doing in terms of corporate finance
activities.
And we care about this because we're stockholders.
We want to understand where the money is coming from
and where the money is going to run the company.