
PROFESSOR: Next, we're going to discuss
some of the properties of yield curve dynamics
and the models that describe how interest
rates of various maturities are related to each other.
Let's start with the expectations hypothesis,
which is an important theory about properties
of interest rates.
It is an important benchmark.
To introduce this idea, let's consider
two alternative investment strategies.
Strategy one is very simple.
We start with $1 and invest it into a 10-year discount bond.
Strategy two, invest the same dollar into a 9-year discount
bond, and then reinvest the proceeds
of that first investment over an additional 1-year period.
Of course, we reinvest it at the 1-year spot rate at that time,
between years 9 and 10.
Under the expectations hypothesis,
we assume that bonds do not carry a risk premium, which
means that all of these types of investment strategies
that move money between time 0 and time 10
by investing in different bonds and maybe reinvesting-- they
all earn the same expected rate of return.
In other words, under the expectations hypothesis,
the expected return on strategy two
has to be equal to the expected return on strategy one.
Let's explore the implication of this idea.
First, introduce a new piece of notation.
r sub s as a function of t is going
to denote the spot interest rate at time t with a maturity s.
By default, we're going to set t equal to 0.
So we're talking about interest rates at time 0.
Consider our two strategies-- strategy one, strategy two.
In the formula, the total return of strategy one
appears on the right-hand side.
It is equal to 1 plus the 10-year spot
rate raised to power 10.
The expected return on strategy two is on the left-hand side.
Notice that the realized return of strategy two is 1 plus
the 9-year spot rate as of time 0 raised to power 9--
that's the return on the first leg of the strategy
and the investment in that 9-year discount bond--
times 1 plus the 1-year spot rate as of time 9.
This is the second leg of the strategy.
And note that there is a squiggle-- the tilde-- on top
of that interest rate, which reminds us
that the spot rate at time 9 is a random variable.
It is not known as of time 0.
The expectations hypothesis equates the expected value
of the left-hand side and the right-hand side.
Of course, the right-hand side is not random.
We know exactly what the spot rate for a 10-year investment
is as of time 0.
It's a 10-year spot interest rate.
Now, if we rearrange the terms in this equation,
we can relate the expected value of a 1-year spot rate at time 9
to the spot rate at time 0 for maturities of 9 and 10.
This equation tells us that the expected value of a 9-year spot
rate is equal to the ratio of 1 plus the 10-year rate raised
to power 10 divided by 1 plus the 9-year spot
rate raised to power 9 minus 1.
Under the expectations hypothesis,
the slope of the yield curve predicts future spot rates.
To see what that means, let's consider our formula closely.
Expected value of a 1-year spot rate at time 9
can be expressed as the ratio of 1 plus the 10-year spot rate
to power 9 divided by 1 plus the 9-year spot rate to power 9
times 1 plus the 10-year spot rate minus 1.
Suppose that the 10-year spot rate
is above the 9-year rate as of time 0.
In other words, the yield curve is upward
sloping between years 9 and 10.
With that information, we can see
that the first term in the formula
is going to be at least as high as 1 plus the 10-year spot
rate.
And so as a result, the expected interest rate
over a single year at time 9 has to be higher
than the 10-year spot rate at time 0.
In other words, when the yield curve is upward sloping,
it's telling us that the expected spot
rate in the future has to be relatively high.
If the yield curve was downward sloping,
we would find the reverse, that the expected spot rate
at time 9 is relatively low.
Now, in a special case when the 10-year rate
is equal to the 9-year rate, using the formula,
we can see that the expected value of a 1-year spot
rate at time 9 is equal to the 10-year or the 9-year spot
rates at time 0.
More generally, the expectations hypothesis
tells us there is a relation between expected future spot
rates and the current spot rates.
This is a direct generalization of the equation
that we derived in our example.
The expected 1-year rate at time t
is related to the spot rates for periods t and t plus 1.
Specifically, it's the ratio of 1
plus the spot rate for period t plus 1 raised to power t
plus 1 divided by 1 plus the t period spot
rate raised to power t minus 1.
Under the expectations hypothesis,
the expected value of the future interest rates
is based on the current interest rates.
As an alternative to the expectations hypothesis,
consider the following so-called liquidity hypothesis.
Under this idea, investors regard long-term bonds
as relatively risky relative to short-term bonds.
For example, if you are an investor with a relatively
short horizon, and you buy a long-term bond,
at the end of your investment period
when you liquidate your position, the payoff is random.
It depends on the future interest rates.
In contrast, if you invest into a short-term bond,
your payoff could be relatively less risky or even fixed.
That's one of the arguments that could be used to justify
the liquidity preference.
More generally, under the liquidity preference
hypothesis, the equation that we derived for the expectations
hypothesis needs to be modified.
The right-hand side is the same.
It relates spot rates of different maturities.
On the left-hand side, what we see
is that in addition to the expected future spot rate,
we have an additional term, lambda,
which represents the so-called risk premium or a liquidity
premium.
In other words, the slope of the yield curve over various points
down the curve between time t and t plus 1
represents not only the expected future spot rate, but also
an adjustment that accounts for riskiness
of bonds of long maturities.
The implication of this hypothesis
is that if lambda is positive, than the long bonds on average
receive a higher rate of return than the short-term bonds.
In other words, if you're thinking
about predicting interest rates using the shape of the yield
curve, this tells us that the spot interest
rates of long maturities overpredict
the future short-term rates.
So if you use the expectations hypothesis formula,
and you form a forecast of the spot rate using that relation,
that forecast is going to be biased.
It's going to be upward biased.
And the reason for that is that the slope of the yield
curve between various points is not equal to the expected spot
rate, but also accounts for a liquidity or a risk premium.
Historically, long-term bonds produced higher average rates
of return than short-term bonds.
For instance, if you look at the period from 1926 until 2018,
the average rate of return on short-term Treasury
bonds in the US, the Treasury bills, has been 3.4%.
In comparison, long-term bonds earned 5.9%.
This highlights the fact that, on average, long-term bonds
produce a higher rate of return than short-term bonds.
This empirical fact tells us that the expectations
hypothesis does not describe market dynamics very well.
Under the expectations hypothesis,
average rates of return on long-term bonds
and on short-term bonds would have to be the same.
Empirically, they're quite different.
So why do long-term bonds earn a higher rate of return?
Why is there a positive spread or the positive risk premium
attached to the long-term bonds?
There could be several potential reasons for that.
One reason is that short-term bonds are in a way money-like.
They are relatively liquid.
They hold their value better in the short run
than long-term bonds.
If investors have needs for these types of securities that
are relatively safe over short horizons,
then they will be willing to pay more for short-term bonds.
In other words, they will be willing to accept lower
rates of return on these bonds.
The rate of return on cash, on money, is 0.
And short-term bonds, which are money-like,
accordingly would have to have lower rates of return.
That's one argument.
Another reason for why long-term bonds
may pay higher rates of return than short-term bonds
is because they are more exposed to inflation risk.
We're talking about nominal bonds here.
They lose value when inflation spikes.
Suppose there is news that inflation in the future
is going to be higher.
This news is going to reduce the value of long-term bonds
and is going to raise future interest rates.
Short-term bonds are relatively immune to these types
of shocks.
As a result, inflation risk is going
to affect long-term bond investors
more than those invested in short-term securities.
This could be one reason why investors in long-term bonds
would demand a higher rate of return
to compensate them for inflation risk.
We have seen a couple of theories
that talk about various determinants of yields
or interest rates across maturities.
Expectations of future spot rates, of course,
affect interest rates of various maturities.
But that is not the whole story.
Risk of long-term bonds is also important.
So expectations of future rates and their risk
ultimately determine the shape of the yield curve.
Expectations hypothesis assumes that there is no risk premium,
that interest rates across maturities
are based on the expected future spot rates.
The liquidity preference hypothesis
incorporates considerations of risk.
But it is not very specific about how, exactly, risk
affects spot rates across the yield curve.
There are more explicit, dynamic theories of the term structure
that develop mathematical models of how
interest rates across maturities evolve across time
and how their behavior is shaped by expectations
of future rates and their risk.
Examples of these are the Vasicek model,
the Cox-Ingersoll-Ross model, and so forth.
You can learn more about these dynamic models of the yield
curve in the fixed income course.