
PROFESSOR: In this class, we will talk
about fixed income securities--
the properties, the markets where they trade,
and some of the important elements
of analytics of dealing with fixed income assets, how
we price them.
Let's begin with a general overview of fixed income
markets and securities.
A fixed income security is a financial claim
with promised cash flows of fixed amount and fixed dates.
When we use the term fixed income, this refers to the fact
that these securities are explicit about which cash
flows are promised and when.
This does not mean that they are risk free.
Obviously, there could be circumstances
when these securities do not deliver the promised cash
flows.
There are various types of fixed income securities traded
in the markets, and these form an important part
of capital markets.
We are going to mention just several of the major classes
of fixed income securities.
At the top of our list are treasuries.
These are government bonds issued
by various governments, US treasuries, Japanese government
bonds, German bonds.
These are used by governments to conduct their fiscal policy.
In the United States, we also have
debt of fixed income assets issued by the federal sponsored
agencies, such as Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.
And these are the agencies that support
the functions of the housing market,
and they are important players in the fixed income markets.
Municipal bonds are a little bit different from treasuries
because of their tax treatment.
Municipal bonds in the United States
are exempt from the federal tax.
And for the local investors, they
are also exempt from the local state taxes.
Corporate bonds are also an important and large part
of the fixed income market.
They come in various forms and shapes.
They differ across maturities and various properties
of securities that we are going to discuss a little bit later.
Corporate bonds are issued by firms
and are used to finance a variety of business activities.
Finally, we should mention mortgage-backed and
asset-backed securities, which are created
using financial engineering using the process called
securitization.
And these assets are based on an underlying pool of other more
primitive assets, such as mortgages, car loans, student
loans, and so forth.
The following pie chart gives us a snapshot of the bond markets
in the United States in 2019.
As you can see here, there are three large segments
of the market that capture most of the market value
across fixed income securities.
First, the treasuries.
Treasuries account for roughly a third
of the fixed income market.
These are bonds issued by the US government.
Second, mortgage-related securities.
These are at a lower level than the treasury market,
but they capture roughly a quarter
of the fixed income market.
These are securities that are backed by pools of mortgages.
We also see that the corporate debt market is roughly
of the same size as the mortgage-related securities
and accounts for roughly a quarter
of the fixed income market.
We have several smaller segments,
such as debt securities issued by federal agencies--
Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac.
These are at roughly 4% of the total market.
Asset-backed securities-- these are
securities that are backed by pools
of financial assets other than mortgages-- car loans, student
loans.
These are at around 4% of the total market.
And the municipal market is about 8% of the total.
And finally, the money markets, which
are very short maturity securities, that
stands at around 2% of the total market.
What we can see from this graph is that fixed income markets
are fairly heterogeneous.
There are several large segments.
And in our discussion, we are going
to focus on some of these in particular.
In today's lecture, our primary focus
is going to be on the valuation of treasuries.
And in the following classes, we're
going to talk about pricing of corporate bonds.
Next, let's consider participants
in the fixed income markets.
It is convenient to think in terms
of three broad categories--
the issuers, the intermediaries, and the investors.
This division is not exact, and some
of the players in these markets play multiple roles
and show up in different categories.
Issuers in these markets are those entities that
issue fixed income securities.
These are the borrowers in fixed income markets.
Governments are important players
in fixed income markets.
They issue treasuries, government bonds.
Municipalities are the source of municipal securities
and corporations, who issue corporate bonds.
There are various intermediaries present in these markets that
facilitate primary transactions, which is when a borrower issues
the bond for the first time, as well as secondary market
transactions.
This is when the bonds change hands
and are traded among investors.
We are going to highlight only a few
of the intermediaries that are important.
We have various kinds of dealers in these markets.
We have primary dealers and other dealers.
Primary dealers play a special role in the sense
that they participate in the auctions of government
securities.
So they are the first ones to absorb
the supply of government bonds.
Other dealers facilitate transactions
in the secondary market among investors.
For example, a treasury starts its life
by being issued by the US government.
It gets sold to a primary dealer,
which could be a large bank.
And then it eventually gets sold in the secondary market
to other investors.
A bond can, of course, change hands multiple times
throughout its life by being traded in the secondary market.
Investment banks play an important role
as intermediaries in the fixed income markets.
They serve multiple functions.
They can act as a dealer holding an inventory of bonds.
They can act as a broker making matches
between buyers and sellers of fixed income securities.
And they can also help corporations or municipalities
issue their bonds.
So they can help in the primary transactions.
They can help structure bonds and place them with investors.
An important class of players in fixed income markets
are credit rating agencies.
This is a somewhat unique feature.
We do not see this kind of entity in the equity markets.
They are specific to the fixed income markets.
As the name suggests, credit rating agencies,
such as S&P or Moody's, serve to provide information
about the quality of fixed income securities.
They rate credit quality.
They attach credit rating to different securities
that indicates the relative riskiness.
This information can be then used by the investors
to decide on how to allocate their capital
across different types of assets.
We're going to look more closely at ratings of bonds
and how they map into their risk when
we discuss risky corporate bonds in the following classes.
There are multiple types of investors in the fixed income
markets.
Pension funds, insurance companies
are big holders of bonds.
In particular, insurance companies
hold large quantities of corporate bonds
and pension funds also hold a significant amount
of treasuries and corporate bonds of various maturities.
Mutual funds hold portfolios of fixed income securities,
and they can be viewed as one example of an entity which
is both an investor and an intermediary in this market.
If you think about the mutual fund
as a holder of corporate bonds, then of course
it acts as an investor.
At the same time, mutual funds serve an important function
of enabling individual investors to deploy
their capital invested in a diversified portfolio
of securities.
And in that capacity, mutual funds serve as intermediaries.
They connect individual investors
to the broad fixed income market.
Hedge funds are also players in multiple capital markets,
including in fixed income markets.
We think of hedge funds as investors in these securities.
They, of course, are also intermediaries
because hedge funds ultimately operate with capital that they
receive from their investors.
Banks and individuals are also buyers
of fixed income securities.