
PROFESSOR: We now consider another important dimension
of bond risk, which is inflation risk.
Bond payoffs are nominal.
As a result, as the price level changes,
as inflation rate changes, the real value of the bond
is affected.
Real payoffs are affected by inflation.
So let's recall what inflation is.
Inflation is the rate of change of the nominal price level.
If you're thinking about prices of consumption goods,
let's say the price of a burger, it may be $5 this year
and $6 five years from now.
What this means is that, for the same consumption good,
the nominal price level is changing
by 20% over a five-year period.
This process of changes in nominal prices
is what we call inflation.
As the price level rises, the real value
of the purchasing power of a single unit of money,
let's say of $1, falls.
So the purchasing power of currency and the price level
are negatively related.
As a result, payoffs of nominal securities, like bonds,
are sensitive to inflation.
As inflation rises, the real value of the payoffs declines.
So let's look at the following example
to illustrate the point.
Suppose that inflation next year, realized inflation rate,
is uncertain.
On average, we expect inflation to be 8%.
But in reality, it could be higher or lower.
Let's say that there are three possible values equally
likely--
10%, 8%, or 6.
The real interest rate is 2%.
This is the risk-free rate of return in real terms,
not in nominal terms.
The 1-year nominal interest rate is approximately 10%
to correct for inflation.
As a result, depending on the realized inflation,
the real return on the 1-year Treasury bond
is going to be different.
If inflation happens to be 8%, exactly as expected,
the nominal payoff of the bond, which is $1,100,
is going to be worth $1,019 in real terms.
If inflation happens to be higher than expected,
the 10%, the same nominal payoff is going to be worth only 1,000
in real terms.
If inflation is lower, 6%, that payoff
is going to be more valuable.
It's going to be $1,038.
The point is that while nominal securities, like Treasury
bonds, may produce safe payoffs in nominal terms,
the payoff is risky in real terms.
Inflation risk is particularly important
for long-horizon investors, who are concerned
with accumulating wealth.
For example, if you're thinking about the household saving
for retirement, it would care a lot
about the purchasing power of their savings rather than
the nominal value.
And, for them, inflation risk would be a first order concern.