
PROFESSOR: Next, we talk about relative valuation
of coupon bonds in relation to pure discount bonds,
or zero coupon bonds.
First, let's consider the relation
between interest rates and bond prices for pure discount bonds.
This is a matter of definition.
Interest rates can express the rate of return on the bond.
Bond prices also explains the rate of return,
but in different terms.
Bond prices and interest rates are directly related
to each other.
The relation is that the bond price with a face value
of $1.00 and maturity t is equal to 1 divided by 1 plus
the interest rate to the power t.
In other words, the price of the bond today
is equal to the face value of the bond discounted
at the rate of interest from now until the maturity
date of the bond.
If we are thinking of interest rates
as the primary source of data, we
can then express bond prices as a function of the interest
rates.
Alternatively, if bond prices are
observed as the primary input, we
can express interest rates as a function of the bond prices.

A coupon bond pays a regular stream
of coupon payments in addition to the principal payment
at maturity.
We're going to think of a coupon bond
as a portfolio of pure discount bonds,
where each of the payments delivered by the coupon bond
can be visualized as a payoff over a single discount bond
with the corresponding maturity.
We are going to use low bond price, or arbitrage valuation,
to establish a connection between the price of a coupon
bond and prices of discount bonds of various maturities.
We can also go in reverse.
We can start with the prices of coupon bonds
and recover implied values of discount bonds.
Let's consider an example.
Suppose we are working with a 3-year year
bond with a $1,000 principal payment and a 5% coupon.
So in the first year, the holder of the bonds
receives a payment of $50; second year, $50;
the third year, it's $1,000 and the $50 coupon payment.
We can think of this bond as a sequence of cash flows
that can be replicated by a portfolio of discount bonds.
In this case, we need three discount bonds.
We need the bond with maturity of 1,
the bond that pays off at time 1, paying $50 at the time.
We the bond that matures at time 2, also paying 50.
And we need a discount bond that pays $1,050 at time 3.
Our coupon bond is equivalent to the portfolio of zero coupon
bonds.
As a result, the price of the coupon bond
has to be equal to the cost of the portfolio of zero coupon
bonds according to the Law of One Price.
If that equality was violated, then there would be arbitrage.
For example, if the price of the coupon bond
were to be lower than the price of the portfolio of zero coupon
bonds that replicate its cash flows,
an investor could buy a coupon bond
and short sell the replicating portfolio of pure discount
bonds to lock in arbitrage profits.
We can generalize this argument to any coupon paying bond.
Of course, there was nothing special about our 3-year bond.
And we arrive at the general formula
that tells us that the price of a coupon bond
is equal to a sum across the dates from one
to the maturity date of the bond, capital T,
of the coupon payment of the bond times the price
of the corresponding discount bond plus the principal payment
to be multiplied by the price of the pure discount bond paying
off at time capital T. This is the formula that we see.
The price of the bond is equal to the discounted value
of its cash flows, where we are discounting them
at the corresponding interest rate.
As an example, suppose that the yield curve is given
by the following information.
The discount bond with maturity of 1 trades at 95.2 cents with
a face value of $1.00.
The discount rate with maturity 2 trades at 89.8 cents.
The discount bond of maturity 3 trades at 86.3 cents,
and so on.
We do not need to know the prices of other bonds.
For exercise, now we are pricing the 3-year bond
that we have seen, the price of this bond
comes out to be $998.65, which is
50 times the price of a 1-year bond, which is 95.2 cents,
plus $50 times the price of a 2-year bond, which
is 89.8 cents, plus $1,050 times the price of a 3-year discount
bond, which is 86.3.
This is a special case of the general formula bond.