
PROFESSOR: Bond duration can be used as a measure of bond risk.
Now, let's take a closer look at how well
bond duration approximates the risk of the bond.
Consider the following example.
We have a four-year treasury note with a face value of 100
and a 7% coupon, which is paid semiannually.
So every six month, this bond pays $3.50 in coupons.
In the following table, you can see the cash flows of the bond.
It's 3.50 every six month.
And the payment of $103.5 at the maturity date.
Now, for this bond we can compute the Macaulay duration
as a weighted average of the payment tenors.
And that happens to be equal to 7.13 periods.
Each period is half a year.
So this is a little less than four years.
And the modified duration, which is Macaulay duration divided
by bond plus the yield on the bond, 1 plus 3%,
is equal to 6.92 periods.
So it's a little bit shorter than three and 1/2 years.
Based on this number, based on the modified duration,
our infinitesimal formula can be used to approximate risk
exposure of the bond.
The formula tells us that when the semiannual yield moves
by 0.1%, the bond price should decrease by roughly 0.692%.
The approximate change in the bond in percentage terms
should be equal to the modified duration
times the change in the yield.
Now, this approximation is based on the infinitesimal analysis.
It's based on the Taylor approximation, Taylor expansion
of changes in the bond price.
What happens if yields move by a larger amount?
Is this formula going to remain accurate?
Let's do an experiment.
We're going to change yields by large amounts,
and see how the bond price responds.
In the following table, you could
see the price of our bond exactly computed
as a function of several different values of the bond
yield.
In the middle of the table, we see
that when the bond yield in semiannual terms is 3%,
the price of the bond is 103.5.
Now, we can compute bond price for different yield levels
exactly, or we can compute it approximately based
on the modified duration number.
What we see here is that when yields change by 10 basis
points from 3% to 3.1, the exact bond price
moves from 103.5 to $102.79.
And the duration based formula is producing a highly accurate
approximation.
It's giving us basically the same number.
So the difference shows up in higher order digits
past the decimal point.
Now, let's assume that the yield changes by a large amount.
It goes from 3% to 4%.
Now, the price of the bond drops to $96.63.
That's the exact bond price.
And the approximation based on modified duration
is giving us $96.35.
Now, we can see that there is a difference.
The duration-based formula is under-predicting the bond
price.
The exact price is higher than what we get
based on the duration formula.
This is not surprising.
The modified duration is a first order approximation
the price changes of the bond.
But the exact relation within the bond price and the yield
is nonlinear.
Therefore, when changes in the bond price are large,
we need to think of higher order approximations.
We can see this annotation clearly in the following graph.
The red line here corresponds to the exact price of the bond
as a function of the yield.
The blue line is a linear approximation.
It's giving us a very accurate description of the bond price
if changes in the yield are small.
But it kind of falls short when changes in the yield are large.
This blue line corresponds to the duration-based
approximation.
Our duration number is given as the slope
in the relation between the bond price and the yield.
If we want to account for the nonlinearity,
if you want to capture the most important nonlinear
term, the curvature of this curve,
we need to introduce higher order charts.
So curvature or convexity of this curve
need to be captured by an additional term.
And that term is called the convexity term.
Algebraically, what we can do is expand the bond price
in a Taylor series as a function of changes in the bond yield.
The leading term, which is a derivative
of the bond with respect to the yield times the change
in the yield, the first order term,
is captured by the modified duration.
Modified duration is the negative of this derivative
of the bond price with respect to the yield.
The second order term in the Taylor expansion,
the quadratic term, is what we call bond convexity.
So from the Taylor expansion, we can
see that the natural definition for bond convexity
is one half of the second derivative of the bond price
with respect to the yield divided by the bond price
itself.
The second order term is going to give us
an additional degree of approximation that
goes beyond the leading term, the duration-based term.
Let's see how much the convexity term
helps when the approximate bond price changes
under large movements in the yield curve.
Suppose we are looking at a 10-year bond with a 10% coupon
and a 10% flat yield curve.
The modified duration of this 10-year bond is 6.23 years.
Now, if you look at the column in the center of the table,
this corresponds to the initial position of the bond.
The yield change is zero.
There is no movement in the price.
We're now going to consider different changes in the yield.
For example, what if the yield on the bond
moves up by 100 basis points, or by 1%?
The total change in the bond price is going to be minus $6.
The bond price falls by $6.
The duration-based approximation will tell us
that the bond price falls by $6.2.
There is an approximation error of $0.20.
The convexity term is going to correct that to some degree.
It's going to give us plus $0.30.
At the end of the day when we sum up all of these terms,
we see that the approximation is quite accurate.
The error is less than 10 basis points.
If the yield change is larger than that, for example,
300 basis points, 3%, the total decline in the bond price is
going to be $16.50.
The duration-based approximation is going
to be relatively inaccurate.
It will give us $18.70 decline.
The convexity correction is going to be $2.40.
And the overall error is going to be quite modest,
about $0.20.
What we see from this illustration
is that the convexity approximation, the convexity
term, provides a useful degree of correction
when we are concerned with large movements in the yield curve.