
PROFESSOR: Next, we introduce the concept of yield curve.
Let's first consider cash flows of fixed-income securities
or bonds.
There are three important characteristics
that define a bond--
time to maturity; the principal payment,
which is the payment that the bond is
promising at the maturity date; and the coupon.
For example, the bond that you can see here
is a three-year bond with a $1,000 face value, or principal
value, and a 5% annual coupon.
So each year, bond investors receive $50 in coupons.
And at the maturity date, in addition to the last coupon
payment, they receive a $1,000 principal payment.
We are going to value fixed-income securities using
absence of arbitrage or the law of one price.
We are going to limit our attention to situations where
default risk is irrelevant.
And the only dimension we are going to focus on
is the time value of money.
In other words, we are going to develop arbitrage relation
for risk-free bonds, default-free bonds.
Prices of various fixed-income securities
provide information that we need to value other cash flows,
other risk-free cash flows.
Markets provide various sources of information
about prices of bonds.
We could infer discount rates for different maturities
from prices of pure discount bonds--
these are bonds that do not pay coupons--
from prices of regular coupon bonds
or from other fixed-income securities.
At the end of the day, all of these various securities
are connected to each other by the law of one price
or by absence of arbitrage.
And we can use any combination of fixed-income assets
as long as there is sufficient leverage
to infer prices of other fixed-income securities.
Next, we define the spot interest rate.
The spot interest rate varies with maturity.
The spot interest rate for maturity t
is the rate of return that the fixed-income investor
is going to receive by investing today and collecting the payoff
t periods from now, t years from now.
Spot interest rates are indexed by their term, t.
So when we talk about spot interest rates,
we are talking about the entire term
structure of interest rates.
For each maturity, there is a corresponding interest rate.
This collection of interest rates
corresponding to different maturities
is called the yield curve.
If you look at the snapshot of the yield curve,
on the 8th of June of 2019, you can
see that the spot rates differ across maturities.
For example, if you were to invest for a period of one
year, the interest rate-- the risk-free rate in the market--
would be 1.99%.
If you invest for a period of 30 years,
the interest rate is different.
It's 2.57%.
It is higher in this case.
The shape of the yield curve does not
stay constant over time.
It varies.
And next, we are going to discuss
how the shape of the yield curve changes
with economic conditions.
On this graph, you can see the history
of interest rates or the yield curve from 1977 until 2019.
There are several lines on the graph,
which correspond to interest rates of different maturities.
These are color coded.
We are looking at interest rates for 1, 3, 5, 10, and 30 years
to maturity.
One thing we can see is that there is a common component
in all of these interest rates.
They tend to move to some degree together.
That's an important property of the yield curve.
There is something common about movements in interest rates.
Historically, what we observed is that over the last two,
three decades, interest rates across maturities
have been generally declining and are
now at a relatively low level compared
to the beginning of this sample, which
was late '70s and early '80s.
Another observation is that the difference
between the rates of various maturities
does not stay constant either.
There are periods when interest rates across maturities
are quite different.
Generally, interest rates on short-maturity bonds,
short-maturity fixed-income securities,
are lower than interest rates for longer maturities.
There are times when interest rates seem
to converge across maturities.
And sometimes, the yield curve even flips, in a sense
that short-term interest rates are higher than long term.
There is a correlation between these events
and general economic conditions.
What we have seen historically is that typically, convergence
of interest rates or inversion of the yield
curve with the long rates declining relative
to short rates tends to happen at the beginning
of recessionary periods.
This is not an exact law.
It is a statistical relation.
