
PROFESSOR: Next, we consider the concept of interest rate risk.
And in particular, we will introduce the concept
of bond duration, which is a quantitative measure of risk
exposure of bonds.
Now, bonds are fixed-income securities,
but they're not risk free.
If you invest in a long-term bond and interest rates change,
the value of the bond will change accordingly.
Movements in interest rates are uncertain.
They're random.
And therefore, changes in bond prices or bonds returns
are also random.
They're risky.
Now, if you look at the graph here,
you could see how the bond price depends
on the yield of the bond.
The relation is negative.
As the yield on the bonds rises, the bond price falls.
This negative relation is going to tell us
how sensitive bond prices are to changes in yields
or in interest rates.
As an example, suppose that the term structure is flat.
All spot interest rates are equal to y.
Let's say that at the yield of 5%,
the price of a particular bond is $90.
If yields suddenly move to 4%, the bond price rises.
Let's say, it rises to $91.80.
The relative price change of the bond is 91.8 minus 90 over 90--
that's the bond's return--
equal to 2%.
If we normalize the return of the bond
by the change in the yield, the ratio
of 2% bond return to 1% change in the yield is 2.
In this case, we can think of this number
as a quantitative measure of risk.
It's a measure of sensitivity of the bond
price to changes in the yield.
Notice that we've changed the sign here.
The yield change is in fact minus 1%.
This is a common convention.
We want our risk measure to be positive,
so we're going to change the sign to achieve that.
Now more generally, we're going to measure risk of the bond
by looking at the infinitesimal changes in the yield
and how bond prices respond to said changes.
This is going to define a measure of bond risk.
Mathematically, we are going to measure bond risk using what
is called modified duration, which
is defined as the negative of the derivative of the bond
price with respect to the yield change,
normalized by the bond price itself.
In other words, this is the infinitesimal change
in the bond price in percentage terms divided
by the infinitesimal change in the level of interest
rates in the yields.
Now, consider as a special case a pure discount bond.
This is a t period bond, which trades at the price Bt.
That price is equal to 1 plus the yield raised
to power minus t.
If we substitute this bond price into the definition of modified
duration, we find that for the pure discount bond,
modified duration is equal to t, the maturity of the bond--
time to maturity--
divided by 1 plus the yield.
In other words, modified duration
of the bond and its time to maturity are closely linked.
For a pure discount bond, modified duration
times 1 plus the yield is equal to time to maturity.
This relation suggests that there
is a physical, intuitive interpretation
of bond duration.
It has a lot to do with the maturity structure of the cash
flows of the bond.
Next, we introduce a closely related concept,
Macauley duration, which makes it even more clear
that bond duration and maturity structure of its cash flows
are directly connected.
So consider a general stream of cash flows--
risk-free cash flows.
Call them CFt for period t.
We define Macauley duration as follows.
For each tenor t, we compute the present value
of the corresponding cash flow.
We normalize it by the total value of the cash flow, B.
And we use this as a weight.
And using these weights, we average the tenors from 1
to capital T.
According to this definition, each tenor t
contributes something to Macauley duration.
And it contributes more if the corresponding cash
flow is larger, if it accounts for a larger
fraction of the total price of the security.
Physically, you could think of this
as a definition of the center of gravity of the payment tenors.
As it turns out, Macauley duration
and the modified duration that we just defined
are directly related to each other.
And in fact, modified duration is Macauley duration
normalized by 1 plus the yield.
So what we see is that modified duration
is proportional to the weighted average of the payment tenors
where the weights are proportional
to the present value of the corresponding cash flows.
Indeed, the duration of the bond is directly
based on the term structure of its payments.
Next, consider an empirical example.
Instead of computing bond duration
based on the term structure of its payments,
we can estimate its duration by running
a regression of bond returns on changes in yields,
or changes in interest rates.
We'll look at several examples.
We'll look at 5-year Treasuries, 10-year Treasuries,
and 30-year Treasuries.
As you can see from the first graph,
changes in the price of a 5-year Treasury bond returns
are closely linked to movements in interest rates.
There is a very strong statistical relation
between them.
And the slope coefficient is less than 5.
What this is telling us is that the factor
of duration of a 5-year treasury is less than 5.
And that is because these bonds pay coupons.
And as a result, the center of gravity of their payments
is somewhere between 0 and 5 years.
It's close to 5 years, because the bulk of the payments
comes at the maturity date of the bond.
We observe a similar picture for the 10-year
and the 30-year bond.
Again, bond returns are explained very well
by changes in the level of interest rates.
And the slope coefficient in these regressions
is closely related to the maturity structure of the bond
payment.
It is under 10 years for a 10-year bond.
And it's somewhere between 0 and 30 years for a 30-year bond.