
PROFESSOR: We now consider a more general bond valuation
problem.
Previously, we started with prices of pure discount bonds.
And we figured out how to value a coupon bond.
Now, we are looking at the generic situation
where we start with prices of different types of bonds.
Some are discount bonds.
Some are coupon paying bonds.
And we want to answer two questions.
One is what are the implied interest rates?
What are the prices of discount bonds?
And the second question is if you observe
an instance of mispricing--
if some of the prices are inconsistent with each other--
how can you take advantage of it?
How can you build an arbitrage trading strategy?
So to be specific, we have three bonds
to start with, A, B, and C. A is a one-year discount bond
paying $100 at time 1.
B is a two-year coupon bond paying a 5% annual coupon.
And C is a three-year coupon bond
paying a 10% annual coupon.
And the prices of these bonds are given in the table.
A trades at $96 at time 0.
B trades at $99.30.
And bond C trades at $108.80.
We are also given bond D, which is a three-year discount
bond with a face value of $100.
And D trades at $84.
The question is, is this bond fairly priced?
And if it is not, how can we take advantage of mispricing?
So to start with, we are going to collect
given information in a matrix.
It's a matrix of bond payoffs.
And you could see that each of the rows
corresponds to one of the bonds, A, B, and C.
And for each of the bonds, we are tabulating their cash
flows.
Bond A pays $100 at time 1 and 0 afterwards.
Bond B pays $5 at time 1, $105 at time 2, and 0 afterwards.
And bond C pays $10, $10, and $110 at time 3.
Now, we are trying to find prices of discount bonds
of maturities 1, 2, and 3 years.
Let's call them P1, P2, and P3.
Each of these bonds has a face value of $1.
Let's relate prices of these bonds to the given bonds.
For example, focus on bond B. This bond
is equivalent to a portfolio of discount bonds--
five units of a one-year bond and 105 units
of a two-year discount bond.
So we obtain a pricing equation.
5 times P1 plus 105 times P2 plus 0 times P3 is equal
to $99.30.
We can obtain a similar pricing equation for bonds A and C.
As a result, we have a system of equations,
three equations, each one corresponding
to a price of a single bond.
And we have three unknowns, each one corresponding
to a price of a discount bond, 1, 2, and 3.
This system of equations has a unique solution,
which you can compute.
And what we find is that P1, the price of a one-year discount
bond, is $0.96 cents.
P2 is $0.90.
And P3 is $0.82.
What we have done is we recovered
prices of discount bonds.
Or in other words, we recovered the spot interest rates
from the collection of prices of various fixed income
securities, different types of bonds--
coupon bonds and discount bonds.
Now, looking at our solution, we can
see that the price of the bond D is not
consistent with the prices of A, B, and C. D trades at $84,
but the implied price for a three-year discount bond
is $82.
So D is not fairly priced relative to A, B, and C.
How can we take advantage of this situation?
We are going to build an arbitrage strategy.
Let's recall that an arbitrage strategy is
supposed to be self-financing.
It does not require any infusion of capital.
It's supposed to be risk free.
There is no risk of losing money.
And it's supposed to be profitable.
There should be a positive probability of generating
a positive cash flow.
So we're going to construct a portfolio of bonds A,
B, C, and D to generate arbitrage profits.
Let's call our positions xA, xB, xC, and xD respectively.
And x refers to the number of shares
of each of these securities in our portfolio.
Our objective is going to be to generate
a cash flow of $1 at time 0 and nothing in periods 1, 2, and 3.
Of course, this is arbitrage.
There is no risk of a loss.
And we get $1 for free at time 0.
That's the free lunch arbitrage.
Now, this requirement can be expressed
as a system of four equations.
Each equation corresponds to the cash flow
coming out of the portfolio in a given period.
The first row corresponds to time 0; second, time 1;
2; and 3 respectively.
So now, for the first period, we want
to generate a cash flow of $1.
The cash flow that the portfolio produces
can be computed as a function of the portfolio positions, xA,
xB, xC, and xD.
In particular, when you buy a security-- let's say,
you're buying bond A--
you are generating a negative cash flow
for each share you buy.
The negative cash flow is equal to the negative of the price
of the bond at time 0.
At time 1, you generate a positive cash flow, $100,
which corresponds to the payoff of the bond.
And then because the bond expires at time 1,
it pays nothing in periods 2 and 3.
So looking at time 0, the cash flow of the portfolio
is going to be minus $96 times xA--
that's the contribution of bond A--
minus $99.3, which is the price of bond B,
times xB, and so forth.
So we're summing, across all four bonds,
the size of the position times the negative of the bond price.
The combined cash flow at time 0 is supposed to be $1.
That's the requirement for our arbitrage strategy.
At time 1, we want the strategy to pay off 0.
So the cash flow of bond A times the number of shares,
which is 100 times xA, plus the cash flow of bond B,
which is 5 times the number of shares-- times xB--
plus 10 times xC-- that's contribution of bond C--
plus 0 times xD, because bond D does not
pay anything at time 1.
That sum has to be equal to 0.
And so we obtain the same kind of equation
for time 2 and time 3.
We have four equations and four unknowns.
The unknowns are the positions in the portfolio for bonds A,
B, C, and D. The system of equations
has a unique solution, which we find.
What we see is that we can indeed
generate arbitrage profits.
We knew that because prices were internally inconsistent.
And to do that, we have to take a short position in bond A
and in bond B. The size of the position
is minus 0.0433 shares.
We take a long position in bond C. The size is 0.4545 shares.
And we short half a share of bond D. The strategy
has no risk of a loss and generates a single dollar
of profit at time 0.
In conclusion, what this example illustrates
is that when you observe a rich set of fixed-income securities,
you can infer prices of various other assets.
You can price securities relative to each other.
There are strong arbitrage-based restrictions
on the relative prices of assets in fixed-income markets.
In particular, prices of coupon bonds
can be used to infer prices of discount bonds,
or in other words, spot interest rates.
We can therefore recover the yield curve
from the prices of coupon bonds.
So far, we looked at arbitrage restrictions
in a static framework.
Our trading strategy was one short trade at time 0.
We generated arbitrage profits.
These arbitrage-based methods are more general than that.
And they can be used in a dynamic setting that
can be applied over time.
To do that, we need to build models
which are dynamic, that incorporate trading
over multiple periods.
And this is a subject for future lectures.