
PROFESSOR: Next, we introduce an important concept
in fixed-income markets called yield to maturity.
If you open the Wall Street Journal
or you look at quotes for bond prices
on Bloomberg or another data source,
you're going to see that bond prices are typically
quoted not in dollars but in terms of their yield
to maturity.
Yield to maturity of the bond is defined as the rate of return
such that if it is applied across all of the maturities
from 1 to capital T, then the discounted value
of the cash flows paid by the bond
is equal to the bond price.
In other words, as you can see from the formula, if you
pretend that spot rates across all of the maturities
are the same and equal to yield to maturity,
then you should recover the bond price.
Yield to maturity is thus defined as the solution
of this equation.
Yield to maturity is a quoting convention.
It's a way of quoting bond prices.
It does not represent the rate of return
that the bond investor collects.
It is simply a way of summarizing
price information of the bond in a way that's
relatively intuitive.
Yield to maturities cannot be used to compare bonds to each
other.
A bond with a high yield to maturity
does not necessarily pay a higher return
or represent a better deal to the investors.
Again, these are simply quoting conventions.
Based on the definition, yield to maturity
is a somewhat complex weighted average
of spot rates across maturities.
It's a weighted average of interest rates.
Consider the following example.
Suppose that the 1-year interest rate is 5%,
and the 2-year rate is 6%.
These are the spot rates.
These are the rates of interest that investors
can collect in the market.
Now consider a 2-year treasury with a principal payment
of $100 and a coupon rate of 6%.
This bond pays $6 in the first year
and $106 in the second year.
Let's apply the definition of yield to maturity to this bond.
First, we compute the bond price.
The price of this bond is equal to 6
the first payment discounted to the 5% rate
over a single year plus 106--
that's the second payment--
discounted at the 6% interest rate over two years.
The total value, the price of this bond, is $100.05.
To compute the yield to maturity for this bond,
we now need to solve the equation.
$6 discounted at the rate y, yield
to maturity, over a single year plus $106 discounted at yield
to maturity over two years has to equal
the price of the bond, $100.05.
It turns out that the solution to this equation is 5.97%.
That is the yield to maturity of our bond.
If we plug this into the definition of yield
to maturity, we see the discounting cash
flows of this bond at 5.97% recovers the bond price.
As you can see, yield to maturity
falls somewhere between the two interest rates.
It's between 5% and 6%.
It's a lot closer to 6% because most
of the cash flows of this bond are paid at time 2.
In other words, yield to maturity
is some kind of weighted average of the spot rates.
But it is not a simple arithmetic average.
It's a solution of a somewhat complicated equation.
So it's a nonlinear function of the spot rates.
Yield to maturity has several simple properties
in relation to the coupon rate of the bond, which
are useful to keep in mind for thinking qualitatively
about how prices of bonds, their coupon rates, and yield
to maturity are related to each other.
First of all, bond price is inversely
related to yield to maturity.
As you increase yield to maturity,
you're discounting cash flows of the bond at a higher rate.
And of course, the bond price then declines.
The second property is that the bond sells at par,
meaning that the price of the bond
is equal to the principal payment,
if and only if yield to maturity is equal to the coupon rate.
To see why that is the case, consider
a bond with the principal payment
of 1 and the coupon rate c.
The price of this bond is equal to the sum
of its coupons discounted at the yield
to maturity y plus the principal payment, which
is 1, discounted at the yield to maturity back to time 0.
If we use the formula for an annuity with a rate of return
y, we can rewrite the price of the bond as a sum of two terms
that you can see on the right-hand side.
The important thing to note here is
that if the yield to maturity is equal to c, the coupon
rate of the bond, the second term disappears and becomes
equal to 0.
And the first term equals 1.
So the bond price is 1, which is the principal payment.
What this equation tells us is that when yield to maturity
equals the coupon rate, the bond price
is equal to the principal payment of the bond.
The bond price is declining as a function of yield
to maturity, which means that if yield to maturity
exceeds the coupon payment, the bond price is going to trade
at a level below the principal.
In this case, we say that the bond trades at a discount.
It trades below the par value.
If the yield to maturity is lower than the coupon rate,
then the bond is going to trade at a premium,
meaning that the price of the bond
will exceed the principal payment.