
PROFESSOR: Without further ado, let's
begin with the first topic, IOs and POs.

Recall from the Week 10 lecture that principal-only (PO)
and interest-only (IO) securities
could be created from mortgage-backed securities,
MBSes.
In particular, investors in IOs receive only the interest
payments from the underlying pool
of mortgages for the mortgage-backed security
while investors in POs receive only the principal payments
on the mortgages.
Let's assume that you're provided
with the following information on the estimated prices
and prepayment rates for two different mortgage-backed
securities, Security A and Security B,
that are based on the same pool of underlying mortgages.
In the first column, we see as interest rates increase
from 6% to 8%, the Percent PSA, which represents the prepayment
behavior, decreases from 450% to 360%, the price of Security A
increases from $92 to $98, and the price of Security B
decreases from $103 to $98.
In Part A, we are asked, which of the two securities, Security
A or Security B, is an IO, which is a PO, and why?

Well, the first thing to ask ourselves here
is what does the Percent PSA column mean in this table?
Well, recall from the lecture that the standard 100% PSA
model assumes that the annual pre-payment rate increases
linearly from 0% immediately after the origination
of the mortgage to 6% after 30 months.
Higher values of percent PSA indicate faster prepayment
behavior and as evidenced in the table above,
prepayments generally increase as interest rates decline.
That's why as the interest rate increases
going down the table here, the percent PSA decreases.

The thing to notice here is that the price of Security A
actually falls when the percent PSA is
larger and, equivalently, prepayments increase.
On the other hand, the price of Security B
increases when the percent PSA is larger and prepayments
increase.
Since we know that investors in POs prefer faster repayment
of principal -- they are principal-only securities,
by the way --
Security B is the PO.
Security A must be the IO because as prepayments
increase, fewer interest payments
are made to the IO investors.
OK, now that we know that Security B is
the PO and Security A is the IO, Part B
asks to calculate the effective duration
and effective convexity for each security assuming that yields
are currently at 7%.
That is the median value of the interest rate in this table.

We'll recall from the Week 8 recitation that we can
calculate effective duration -- that is,
modified duration that takes into consideration
the influence of optionality --
as follows in Equation 1.
The effective duration is equal to 1
over the initial price of the security times the difference
between the price of the security when interest
rates fall and the price of the security
when interest rates rise divided by 2 times S, where
S is the amount that interest rates rise or fall.
Applying equation 1 to both Security A and Security B
yields for Security A an effective duration of 1 over
96.5 --
that's the initial price when interest rates are at 7% --
times 92 minus 98 --
the price when rates fall to 6% minus the price when rates rise
to 8% --
divided by 2 times s --
s here is 1% or 0.01 as a decimal --
which is equal to negative 3.1.
A similar calculation for Security B
yields an effective duration of 2.5.
This should make sense because as we discussed in the Week 10
lecture, it's typical for IOs to have
a negative effective duration over a range
of relevant interest rates and Security A, we said, is the IO,
whereas POs typically have a positive effective duration
and we said that security B is the PO.
Finally, the effective convexity of Security A and Security B
could be calculated as follows using Equation 2.
The effective convexity is equal to 1 over the price
of the security at the initial interest rate -- in this case,
7% --
times the price of the security when
rates fall to 6% minus the initial price of the security
minus the initial price of the security minus the price
of the security when rates rise to 8% divided by s squared.

Applying Equation 2 to both Security A and Security B
yields an effective convexity of Security A of negative 310.9
and an effective convexity of Security B of positive 100.
The thing to note here is that Security A, the IO,
actually has negative effective convexity,
whereas Security B, the PO, has positive effective convexity.
This is weird because we're pretty much used
to bonds having positive effective convexity,
but it's this optionality, the prepayment risk,
that is causing the IO to have negative effective convexity
for the given range of interest rates.