
PROFESSOR: All right.
That does it for the first topic.
Let's move on to securitization.

As an example of securitization, let's assume
that the following bonds are available in the market where
each bond has LIBOR risk and pricing.
The first bond is a 3.75% fixed-rate coupon
bond that has a yield of 3.716% on a bond-equivalent basis,
a maturity of five years, a modified
duration of 4.483 years, and a convexity of 25.29.
The second bond is a zero-coupon bond
with a yield on a bond equivalent
basis of 3.15%, a maturity of one year, a modified
duration of 0.969 years, and a convexity of 1.879.
In part A, we are asked to consider a plain vanilla
interest rate swap.
That is, a fixed for floating swap
with an annual fixed-rate payment of 3.75%.
That's the payment on the fixed-rate coupon bond
here in the first column.
And an annual floating-rate payment
set to LIBOR and a maturity of five years.
That interest rate is going to correspond to the interest
rate on the zero coupon bond with a one year
maturity and LIBOR risk.
What would be the modified duration
of the swap from the perspective of the floating-rate payer?
Recall that the floating-rate payer in a plain vanilla swap
is effectively long a fixed-rate bond,
in short a floating-rate bond with equal long and short
amounts in present value terms.
Since the modified duration of that long-short portfolio,
is simply the difference between the modified durations
of its component parts, the modified duration
of the swap from the perspective of the floating rate payer, who
is long a fixed-rate bond and short a floating-rate bond
is going to be 4.483.
That's the modified duration of the fixed leg of the swap
that comes from the modified duration of the fixed rate
3.75% coupon bond minus the modified
duration of the floating leg of the swap, which
comes from the modified duration of the one year zero coupon
bond of 0.969.
That difference is equal to 3.514, which is positive.
In part B, it stated that Frida Mae
specializes in financing non-callable commercial
fixed-rate mortgages.
Frida Mae's balance sheet, where all of the figures
are in millions of dollars, looks like as follows.
On the asset side of the balance sheet,
Frida Mae has $280 million in short-term mortgages
with an average modified duration of 0.5 years
and $350 million of long-term mortgages
with an average modified duration of six years.
On the liability side, Frida Mae has $600 million
worth of bank loans with an average modified
duration of one year and $30 million of owner's equity.
Now is Frida Mae adversely exposed
to either an increase or a decrease in interest rates?
If Frida Mae wants to use the swap described in part A
in order to reduce the duration gap between its assets
and liabilities, would it enter the swap
as a fixed-rate payer or a floating-rate payer?
Well first, we can find the modified duration of Frida Mae
assets as the weighted average of the modified
duration of the short-term mortgages on the assets side
of its balance sheet and the modified
duration of the long-term mortgages on the assets
of its balance sheet where the weights are
given by the value of the short-term or long-term
mortgages, either 280 or 350, divided
by the total value of its assets of 630.
That calculation gives you a modified duration
of 3.556 years for Frida Mae's assets.
Clearly, the modified duration of Frida Mae's liabilities
is one year because its only liabilities are
bank loans, which have an average modified
duration of one year.

Now since the modified duration of 3.556 years for Frida Mae's
assets is greater than that of its liabilities,
which is one year, Frida Mae is exposed
to an increase in interest rates as higher interest rates will
cause Frida Mae's net worth, its owner's equity,
to fall in value.
Frida Mae could hedge this duration gap
by entering the swap as a fixed-rate payer.
Which is effectively long a floating-rate bond and short
a fixed-rate bond and has a negative duration.
In part c, we are asked if Frida Mae enters into the interest
rate swap with a notional principal of $370 million
on the side of the transaction recommended
in part B of a fixed-rate payer, estimate what would happen
to the value of owner's equity if interest rates rise
at all maturities by 1%.

Well, we can calculate the change
in the value of owner's equity using the following formula.
The change in owner's equity, E, is
equal to the change in the value of Frida Mae's assets,
short-term mortgages, plus long-term mortgages
minus the change in the value of Frida Mae's liabilities,
loans, plus the change in the value of the swap.
Where d denotes a change in value,
STM denotes short-term mortgages and LTM
denotes long-term mortgages.
Now how do we get these d terms?
Well, recall that we can use modified duration
to approximate the price change of a security
for a small change in interest rates as follows.
The change in price, dP of a security
is equal to the negative of the modified
duration of the security times its price,
times the change in interest rates, dy Therefore,
each component of equation three can
be approximated using the modified duration approximation
on the bottom of the slide.
In particular, the change in the value of owner's equity
is approximately equal to the change
in the value of the short-term mortgages
on the asset side of Frida Mae's balance sheet, which
is equal to the negative of its modified
duration of 0.5 times its value of $280 million times
the change in interest rate dy of 1%, or 0.01 as a decimal,
minus the modified duration of the long-term mortgages
on Frida Mae's balance sheet of six
years times their value of $350 times the change
in interest rates.
Plus, the modified duration of the bank loans on the liability
side of Frida Mae's balance sheet
of one year multiplied by their value of $600 million times dy.
Plus the modified duration of the swap
from the perspective of the fixed-rate payer,
which is normally negative.
So this term here, the modified duration, is negative,
and we put a negative sign in front of that.
And we add the change in value of the swap, which
accounts for the positive sign of 3.514
times the notional value of the swap of $370 million times
the change in interest rate, which overall yields
a change in the value of owner's equity of negative $3.398
million.
So owner's equity would decrease in value of $3.398 million,
or slightly over 10%.

In part d, it's stated that as an alternative to the swap
that we just discussed, Frida Mae's CFO
also considers securitizing some of the long-term mortgages
and using the proceeds from securitization to pay down
its bank loans as liabilities.
There is no recourse on the securitized loans.
Show what happens to the balance sheet if $200 million
of the long-term mortgages are securitized.
After the securitization, would owner's equity
be adversely affected by either a rise
or fall in interest rates?
After securitization, Frida Mae's balance sheet
would be as follows.
The two things to note here is now
that on the asset side of the balance sheet,
the value of long-term mortgages has fallen from $350 million
to $150 million because we sold $200 million
worth of long-term mortgages through the securitization.
On the liability side of the balance sheet,
the value of bank loans has also declined
from $600 million to $400 million
since we paid off $200 million of our liabilities
using the proceeds from the securitization.
Now using equation three, the same equation as before,
to approximate the change in value of owner's equity
for a 1% increase in interest rates,
we find that the change in value of owner's equity
is approximately equal to the change in value
of the short-term mortgages on Frida Mae's asset
side of its balance sheet, which is the same as before.
Now, minus the change in value of the long-term mortgages
on Frida Mae's balance sheet, which
instead of negative 6 times 350 times 0.01
is now negative 6 times 150, since we sold off $200 million
of these long-term mortgages plus one year, which
is the average modified duration of our bank loans
or liabilities, times $400 instead of $600, because we
paid off $200 million of our liabilities
times 0.01, which now gives us a change in value
of negative 6.4, or equivalently the value of owner's equity
falls by $6.4 million, which is actually more than when
using the swap in part C.
Which, if you recall, was negative $3.398 million.
In all, the securitization of a large amount
of long-term mortgages will still
leave Frida Mae with exposure to rising interest rates.
Since it's the duration gap, the average duration
of its assets being longer than that of its liabilities
that are funding them, that's causing
the exposure of Frida Mae to this interest rate risk.