
PROFESSOR: OK, in the final part of the recitation,
let's review a few rapid-fire questions
related to the concepts of duration and convexity.
For the first three questions we'll
consider a five-year, 3.5% coupon
bond with no embedded options and is priced at par.
For each of the following changes to the bond's structure
or to the market environment-- just one at a time--
what would happen to either the effective duration
or effective convexity of the bond?
Effective duration or convexity can, one, not change, two,
become smaller, three, become bigger, or four,
it's indeterminate.
In our first situation in Part A,
the yield curve is going to make a parallel shift downward.
Well, what would be the effect of this parallel shift
downward on the effective duration
and effective convexity of our five-year, 3.5% coupon bond?
Well, both the effective duration
and the effective convexity would go up;
they become larger.
What's the intuition for this?
Well, the lower yield curve-- the parallel shift downward--
has the effect of making more distant payments--
those payments in the bond in, say, year four or year five--
relatively more valuable through the discount rate effect.
Lower discount rates on longer dated payments
increases their value.
Overall, this discount rate effect
is going to put more weight on those more distant terms
in the calculation of duration and convexity
and increase the overall values of effective duration
and effective convexity.
All right, the situation in Part B
is now that our coupon bond is puttable after two
years at par.
Well, the effect on the effective duration of our bond
would be to lower the effective duration,
so it becomes smaller, and the effect
on the effective convexity would be
to increase the effective convexity of our bond--
it becomes larger.
What's the intuition for this?
Well, the put option is going to shorten the effective duration
because the likelihood of receiving future payments
in the bond goes down.
If I have this option to sell the bond back,
that's going to reduce the probability
that the holder of the bond is going to receive payments
in the distant future.
It's going to increase the effective convexity,
on the other hand, by putting a floor on the value of the bond
equal to the price of the put option as interest rates rise.

In Part C, the situation is that the probability
of our coupon bond defaulting in any year increases from 0%--
so it's risk-free-- to 3%.
The expected recovery given default, on the other hand,
is unchanged.
Well, an increase in the probability of default
is going to first, lower the effective duration and second,
lower the effective convexity.
What's the intuition here?
Well, higher default probability is
going to reduce the present value of more distant payments
relative to the total present value of cash flows, basically
the same intuition as in Part B for the put option on the bond.
However, in this case, it's also going
to pull down the convexity of our coupon bond.

In Part D, we don't have a situation,
just a true or false.
We are asked that since PO securities--
principal only securities-- are derivatives based on mortgages,
and mortgages, as we discuss in the week 10 lecture,
have negative convexity due to the prepayment option,
POs also have negative convexity.
Well, this is false.
As we saw in the first part of this recitation,
POs generally have positive convexity.
Unlike their underlying mortgages, the value of POs
rise sharply when interest rates fall since the prepayment
results in the early payment of principal,
which increases the present value of cash flows,
to the PO investors.

Finally, Part E is asking, is the risk
of default on an underlying mortgage
in a mortgage-backed security relevant to the returns
of investors in a mortgage-backed security
issued by, say, one of the GSEs, Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac?

Yes.
As discussed in the week 10 lecture,
it's true that investors are promised the full payment
of their principal and any accrued interest
on these mortgage-backed securities issued
by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac because both of them
provide credit guarantees.
However, that doesn't mean that the returns to investors
are not affected by the risk of default
because default could affect the pattern of realized cash flows,
since at the time of default the full amount
owed on the mortgage is repaid to the investors.
Thus, the possibility of default is
going to affect the duration of the mortgage-backed securities
and its exposure to interest rate risk, exactly
the intuition that we went over on Part C on the slide
previously.
Well that does it for recitation 10
and that does it for the recitations for this semester.
Thank you very much, everyone, for coming.
Good luck on the final exam and hope to see you soon.