PROFESSOR: Those strategies can be
used to manage the risk of a cash position,
say, as we saw with the example of Southwest Savings Bank whose
mortgage assets were much more sensitive to interest rate risk
than were the liabilities that it used to fund them with.

Those strategies are also often used
to manage the risk of derivatives positions that
are being held--
for instance, by a bank that accepted the short side
of a forward interest rate contract initiated
by one of its clients.
Later in the course, we'll see that duration and convexity are
also properties of interest rate sensitive options,
like puts and call options on bonds.
Those options then can be similarly used in interest rate
risk management strategies using the concepts of duration
and convexity.
We'll also see that duration corresponds
to the idea of a delta, and that convexity corresponds
to the idea of a gamma in the more general language
of options pricing.
In fact, that's how the strategies that we're looking
at here got their names.
You may remember being introduced
to the concepts of duration and convexity
earlier in the MicroMasters Program.
But you may not already know is that duration and convexity are
two of the most fundamental and powerful concepts
for measuring, hedging, and speculating on interest rate
risk.
There's several different ways that duration and convexity
are defined.
We'll start with the basics and then go on
to more advanced versions of these concepts that
are much more accurate when cash flows are uncertain.
The advanced concepts are important,
for example, for risk management strategies involving
callable bonds, pre-payable mortgages, or bonds
with significant credit risk.
We'll look at the math behind the basic formulas
and develop intuition for what they
mean with a graphical interpretation.
In order to do the basic calculations involving duration
and convexity, the Excel spreadsheet, convexity.xls,
is available on the course web page.
You should download it and make sure you
know how to use it to reproduce the basic examples discussed
in this lecture.
You will find it to be useful in answering some of the homework
problems too.
These next two slides illustrate the historical interest rate
volatility that has been a major source of risk
for institutions such as banks, portfolio
managers, and hedge funds.
Notice that I'll use the terms rates and yields
interchangeably when describing market conditions
in general terms.
In recent years, short-term interest rates,
both in the US and other developed countries,
have been unusually low and quite stable.
Historically, though, that's an unusual situation
and one that's likely to change again in the future.
This graph shows short term rates
on three-month US Treasury bills going all the way back
to the 1930s.
You can see that there were periods,
like in the late 1970s and early 1980s,
where rates rapidly climbed and then rapidly fell.

These were periods of extreme rate volatility.
Where does interest rate volatility come from?
Narrowly, interest rates are prices
that move to clear the market for borrowing and lending.
And volatility arises from changes in the supply of
and demand for credit.
Taking a step back, though, a variety
of macroeconomic factors drive the supply and demand
for credit, and therefore volatility,
including expectations about future inflation
rates and other government policies
and the strength of the economy.

This graph of long-term rates in the United States
goes back much further, all the way back to the late 1700s.
You can see that long-term rates have also
been quite volatile with long-term trends that sometimes
rapidly reverse themselves.
If you were to compare the volatility of short
and long-term rates over the same fixed horizon--
say, of five years--
you would find that the standard deviations of short-term rates
are higher than those of long-term rates.
Long-term rates tend to change more slowly over time.
For that reason, the risk exposure
to rate changes at different points on the yield curve
varies.
Market participants seeking a reliable hedge
have to take those differences and volatility into account.
And we'll see how to do that.

Interest rate or yield volatility
translates directly into price volatility
for fixed income securities.
That's because bond prices and yields are related.
Given a bond's price, you can find its yield.
And given a bond's yield, you can find its price.
The simplest example of this is for a zero coupon bond
with price P, promised face value F, yield per period,
little r, and maturity of N periods.
Clearly, if r goes up, P goes down, and vice versa.
You can also see that this inverse effect
is magnified as the number of periods increases because
of compounding.
From the perspective of a banker, securities dealer,
or fund manager dealing in fixed income securities like bonds
and mortgages, it's often not the rate risk in itself
but rather its impact on the value of the securities
in their portfolio.
In other words, the price risk--
that's the main concern.
For example, if an upward shift in the yield curve
causes a bank's assets to fall in value by more
than it reduces the value of a bank's liabilities,
that will cause a hit to the bank's capital
that may create operational or regulatory problems.
Or in the extreme, it could push it into insolvency.
In the last class, we saw how swaps or futures contracts that
matched the maturity of the quantity being hedged
could reduce that sort of risk.
This week, we'll see how those derivatives can
be used to hedge the risk with much more flexibility using
the concepts of duration and convexity.
