
PROFESSOR: Before digging into the definitions
and interpretations of duration and convexity,
it's important to take another look
at the more general equation relating the price of a bond
with multiple cash flows to its yield to maturity.
The yield to maturity is the single interest rate
that equates the price of the bond
to the present value of its promised payments.

The price and the yield to maturity
contain the same information.
Given one and the cash flows, you can solve for the other.
There are built-in functions in Excel to do these calculations.
Two that are very useful for coupon bonds
are the PV function and the Rate function.
Both are well-documented in Excel.
I've posted a sample spreadsheet that
illustrates the use of these and related functions.
A few things to note.
First, the relationship between the price of a coupon bond
and its yield to maturity is a convex function.
When we look at duration and convexity,
we'll often plot price against yield in a graph like this.

The yield to maturity abstracts from the spot yield
curve, which has more precise information about market rates.
Remember that to find the yield to maturity,
we apply a single discount rate to all future cash
flows regardless of their arrival time.
By contrast, the spot yield curve
captures the fact that the market
assigns a potentially different discount
rate to cash flows arriving at every different maturity.
You should think of the bond prices observed in markets
as reflecting the more detailed information in the spot yield
curve.
That has to be true or else there
would be an arbitrage opportunity.
However, the yield to maturity is an approximation
that's useful in its simplicity of having only one dimension.
Most of the duration and convexity measures
we will focus on do use this yield
to maturity approximation as a relevant rate.
However, there are some duration and convexity concepts,
notably, Fisher-Weil and key rate durations,
that take into account the complexity of the spot yield
curve.

Duration and convexity together answer the question,
approximately how much will a security's price change
for a small change in its yield?
In very general terms, you can think
of the price of any interest sensitive security
as a function of its yield and other characteristics that
affect its price, like its liquidity,
any embedded options, default risk, and so forth.
We'll let f represent this function
without being specific about the form that it takes.

Duration measures are all related
to the first partial derivative of the price with respect
to yield, answering the question, what's
the first order effect on price of a small change in yield?
Convexity measures are all related
to the second derivative of the price with respect
to the yield.

Importantly, these metrics apply not only
to bonds and other fixed income securities,
but also, to derivative contracts
like interest rate, swaps, and futures that are also
interest rate sensitive.
Understanding duration and convexity in this way
is directly relevant to the risk management strategies
based on these metrics.
There are three main factors that affect the bond or bond
portfolio's price sensitivity to yield changes:
remaining maturity, coupon rate, and the general level
of market interest rates.
Duration increases with maturity and it
decreases with coupon rates and the level of market interest
rates.

This example provides a quantitative sense
of the relative importance of maturity and coupon rates
on price sensitivity.
It's based on comparisons of four bonds,
two with maturities of 20 years, and two
with maturities of five years.
For each maturity, there are two bonds,
one with a coupon rate at 9%, and two
with a coupon rate of 5%.
It's assumed that each are originally priced to yield 9%.
The table shows, for a range of decreases and increases
in the market yield, the percentage
change in the price of the bond relative to its price
when yields are at 9%.
Each row of the table represents a particular yield change.
For example, the highlighted row shows the percentage price
change for each bond when rates go from 9% down to 8%.
Comparing across maturities, we can
see that the percentage price increase is much larger
for the 20-year bonds than for the five-year bonds, holding
coupon rates fixed in each case.
Now, comparing across coupon rates,
the percentage price increase is smaller for the higher coupon
rate bond holding maturities fixed.
Both of these regularities are true in general,
although the magnitudes will vary
with the bond characteristics and with market rates.
Notice, too, that the changes are not symmetric, say,
for a 1% increase in rates versus a 1% decrease.
The larger absolute magnitude of the changes when
rates fall than when they rise, all else equal,
is related to the positive convexity of the bonds.
We'll confirm that shortly.
If you'd like to see how this example was calculated,
the Excel file I'm showing here has the calculations embedded
and you can download it and take a look.
