
PROFESSOR: With all of that for context,
we're ready to turn to some of the most frequently used
duration measures.
The oldest measure of duration, known as Macaulay Duration
after the man who invented it, represents the elasticity
of a bond price with respect to its yield.
In economics and finance, an elasticity
is the percentage change in one variable--
in this case, the price of a bond or a portfolio of bonds
with respect to the percentage change in a second variable;
in this case, the yield to maturity.
Notice that the expression here is multiplied by a minus sign.
That's in order to define the duration as a positive quantity
when the derivative of price with respect to yield
is negative, as is typical for bond prices, which
move inversely to yields.
This equation represents the idea
in terms of derivatives of bond price with respect
to its yield, normalized by this expression
on the right-hand side, which puts
everything in percentage terms.
That is, we have the percentage change in price with respect
to the percentage change in yield.
Because a bond's price sensitivity changes over time
as its remaining maturity shrinks
and as market interest rate conditions change,
duration is a property of a bond or portfolio,
the point in time.
And it changes over time.
Now, Macaulay applied this to our familiar equation
for the price of a bond as the present discounted value
of its promised cash flows by taking
the derivative with respect to the yield to maturity.
The result of Macaulay's calculation
is the top formula here.
To explain the notation briefly, the yield Y
is stated as an annual percentage rate and k
is the number of assumed compounding periods per year.
The total number of periods, capital T, when divided by k,
gives the life of the bond in years.
This representation allows for bonds
with payments on a daily, monthly, quarterly, annual,
and so forth basis.
The derivation of the formula is optional for you
but it's included in the appendix
section of these slides in case you want to take a look.
Now, the top formula can be rewritten to a more intuitively
interpretable form.
That's in this highlighted equation here.
It says that the Macaulay Duration turns out
to be a weighted average of the arrival time of the promised
cash flows, where the weights are present value weights.
That is, the present value of cash flows
arriving at a point in time divided
by the total present value or price of the bond
So here, we have the fraction of the present value arriving
in the first period, the fraction
arriving in the second period, and so
forth of the last period, each waiting
their respective arrival time.

Let's now reconsider the four bonds we looked at
to compare their price sensitivity to interest rate
changes in Example 3.1.
We can calculate the Macaulay Duration for each of them.
Since duration is a measure of price sensitivity
to yield changes, we'd expect the durations
to have the same ordering as the price sensitivities
we found when we recomputed the prices following a yield
change in the original example.
If you look back at that, you'll see
that's exactly what we find.
This is a good time to introduce you to a handy spreadsheet tool
on the class web page that allows you to calculate
durations and convexity for a coupon
bond with either an annual or semi-annual coupon payment.
It's called duration and convexity calculator.
You might want to open it and follow along
as we go through this example.
Let's take the first bond.
That has a 9% annual coupon with semi-annual payments.
So 4.5% of the face value is paid every 6 months.
Its maturity is 5 years, and it's
priced to yield 9% on a bond equivalent basis, which
means the discount rate is also taken
to be semi-annual at 4.5%.
Enter this information into the spreadsheet,
and then hit Duration to get the Macaulay Duration.
So we have a maturity of 5 years.

2 represents the semi-annual compounding opportunities.
The coupon rate is 9%.
We never need to change the face value.
And we have the yield at 9%.
Hitting Duration, we find a Macaulay Duration of 4.134.
You can see this spreadsheet also
calculates modified duration and convexity, which
we'll return to shortly.
To get the convexity, you also need
to hit the Convexity button, which for this bond,
turns out to be 19.45.
I also want to use the Macaulay Duration
formula to go back and provide a more intuitive understanding
of what drives the price sensitivity of coupon bonds
that don't contain options, such as default or prepayment
options.
The formula says that the duration
is a present value weighted average of cash flow arrival
times.
Again, here k is a number of payments per year.
And capital T is the number of periods.
For example, if T equals 2 and k equals 4,
there's a cash flow every quarter for 2 years.
Clearly, the duration must be less than or equal to the time
to maturity since no cash flows arrive after maturity.
The maximum duration is the maturity,
and that will be the case for a zero coupon bond
where 100% of the cash flows arrive on the maturity date.
All else equal, a higher coupon rate
reduces the duration, because it causes
a higher percentage of the total cash flows to arrive earlier.
Finally, the effect of higher market yields
is also via the present value weights.
As market yields increase, the present value
of the more distant payments gets smaller relative
to the value of the payments arriving sooner.
That puts a higher proportion of the total present value
on the earlier payments, pulling down
the weighted average arrival time of the cash flows
and shortening the duration.

Going back to the more general representation of Macaulay
Duration on slide 12 --
it's also copied here, --
this formula can be rearranged to express the percentage
change in the price of a bond as the product
of minus its duration and the change
in its yield normalized by the factor 1 over 1 plus Y over k.

Because we use this formula so often,
it's convenient to roll up that normalization factor
into the duration measure itself.
That duration measure is called modified duration.
With this definition, we now have a very simple formula
to approximate the percentage price
change of a bond when there's a small change in its yield.
It's simply the modified duration multiplied
by that change in the yield.

Some version of this equation is the basis
for all duration-based hedging strategies
for fixed income securities and their related derivatives.

Let's see how while this duration-based approximation
works by looking at an example.
As you can check with the duration and convexity
calculator, a 20-year 5% coupon bond
with semi-annual coupon payments that's priced to yield 9%
has a modified duration of 10.4.
The predicted price change, if yields increase
from the 9% to 9.1%, according to the duration approximation
formula, is minus the modified duration
times the change in yield, which gives us an approximate price
change of minus 1.04%.
The actual price change can be found
by recalculating the price of the bond,
assuming a discount rate of 9.1% in place of the original 9%.
The actual price change is minus 1.03%.
The approximation is very accurate in this case.
Now let's consider a large yield change from 9% to 11%.
In that case, the duration approximation formula
implies a fall in price of 20.8%.
Again calculating the actual price change,
the price only drops by 17.94%.
We can see that with this large yield change,
the approximation is quite poor.
A general conclusion is that approximations
to price changes based just on duration
work well when there are small changes in yields, but not so
well for larger changes.
This will matter for the effectiveness
of hedging strategies.
Duration-based hedges only offer good protection
if rate changes are modest and they
have to be adjusted over time as yields change.
A useful way to understand why a duration-based approximation
of price changes works well for small changes in yields
is to look at the relationship between the price
and yield graphically.
This diagram plots price against yield for a typical bond.
It's labeled to the actual price curve
and has the characteristic shape that we saw before.
As yields rise, price declines but at a decreasing rate.

We know the duration is related to the derivative of the bond
price with respect to its yield.
Graphically, that means that it's related to the slope
of the tangent line to the actual price curve
at the current yield, which is denoted by Y*.

The duration approximation of the price change
slides up or down that tangent line.
For small changes in yield, the actual price change
gets close to the tangent line approximation.

For a large change in yield, there's
a large gap between the tangent line and the actual price
curve, and the approximation is inaccurate.

Notice too that the slope of the tangent line,
and hence the bond's duration, changes with the yield --
as the yield gets higher, the line flattens.

A flatter slope means shorter duration.

Finally, what about the duration of a short position?
We know that a short position flips the sign
of all of the cash flows.
That flipped the actual price curve
over the x-axis in this diagram, and flipped
the side of the tangent line.
For example, a bond that, in a long position,
has a duration of 4 years, has a duration of minus 4 years
from the perspective of a short position.
A good exercise is for you to try
drawing the graph for the short position that
corresponds to this graph for a long position.
