
SPEAKER: You've now learned the basics about duration
but because the concept is so important
in fixed income risk management strategies,
I want to also briefly introduce you
to some related and more general duration measures that are
practitioners often rely on.

In many applications such as choosing the right size
for a hedge position, the focus is
on the dollar size of a price change
rather than on the percentage change.
To do this, we rearrange our previous formula
for the approximate percentage price change based on
modified duration to get the approximate dollar price
change.

To make calculations using this formula even simpler,
we introduced the notion of $1 duration.
Dollar duration is the modified duration
multiplied by the price.

With that definition, we can approximate the change
in the dollar price of a bond or bond portfolio using
the product of the dollar duration times the change
in yield, and importantly multiplying it by a minus sign.
The concept of dollar duration is
especially important in evaluating risk in a 0 NPV
fixed income portfolio.
One where the present value of a long and short position
are equal.
An example of this is for an interest rate swap or futures
contract, which we know initially always has a 0 NPV
and that we saw was equivalent to holding
a portfolio with a combination of long and short positions.
Clearly, it isn't possible to talk about the percentage
change in the value of a 0 NPV portfolio
because that would require dividing by 0,
but the value of the long and short positions
will change differentially when rates change and the dollar
price change in the portfolio can be approximated
with dollar duration.

I've primarily been emphasizing duration for a single bond
but often it's useful to work with the consolidated duration
for a portfolio consisting of many bonds.
Calculating the duration of a bond portfolio
is straightforward.
The modified duration of a bond portfolio
is the value weighted average of the modified duration
of the bonds in the portfolio.
A simple example of this is at the bottom of the slide.
The dollar duration of a bond portfolio
is simply the sum of the individual dollar durations
of the portfolio components.
Later, we'll see that a portfolio's duration can also
be changed using derivatives contracts.
So far, we've been working with duration measures
to treat the promised cash flows on a bond or portfolio as
if they're a sure thing but that isn't always the case.
Some bonds are callable or putable
or there may be default risk.
In such cases, these embedded call, put, or default options
affect the price of the bond and also its sensitivity
to yield changes.
A good example is a 30-year mortgage
that's likely to be prepaid over a much shorter horizon,
say maybe over seven years.
Calculating its duration as if payments
will continue for 30 years will greatly
overestimate the sensitivity of its value to yield changes.
The most general and most important
duration concept is that of effective duration.
It was developed to provide an accurate approximation of price
sensitivity to interest rate changes
even in cases when there's uncertainty about future cash
flows.
Effective duration is an estimate of the true percentage
price sensitivity, taking into account any embedded options.
Unfortunately, there isn't a general formula
you can use to calculate it.
Rather, it's something an analyst has
to estimate based on their best theoretical or empirical model
of how the price will change for small changes in yield.
But here's a general rule, when cash flows are certain,
modified duration is the same thing as effective duration.
When cash flows are uncertain, it's
better to use effective duration when it's available.
Finally, there are generalized notions of duration
that recognize that a bond's price is not only
sensitive to its yield to maturity but potentially
also to other factors.
Those could include inflation, stock prices,
or changes in yields at particular points
along the yield curve.
The sensitivity to any one of those factors
is called a partial duration.
Partial durations are useful when
you want to tailor a hedge so that it protects
against a specific risk, say of changes in 10-year treasury
yields.
We won't go into this further but it's useful
to be aware of that logic and that it's
very similar to that used in the duration based hedges
that we will look at.
