
PROFESSOR: Let's now turn to the second-order relation
between bond prices and yields, which is known as convexity.
Convexity measures the degree of inward curvature
of the price-yield relationship.
It's based on the second derivative of a securities
price with respect to its yield.
As for duration, there are basic and generalized convexity
measures with those described as effective being
the most accurate in general.
We will see that convexity is used
to improve upon duration-based approximations of price risk
and in many hedging strategies.
It's usually used in combination with duration rather than
as a standalone tool.
A long position in noncallable bonds
always has positive convexity, which is a desirable property.
All else equal, higher convexity means
that prices increase more when yields fall
and decrease less when yields rise.
By the same token, short positions and noncallable bonds
always have negative convexity, which
is an undesirable property.
Convexity is also affected by any embedded options.
And it can be altered by taking derivatives positions
as we'll see in a little while.
Turning to the mouth, convexity is
calculated by taking the second derivative
of the price-yield relationship and dividing by the bond price.
It takes cash flows as certain as in the derivation
of Macaulay or modified duration.
Then we differentiate twice, divide by the bond price,
and we have the formula for convexity.

Whereas duration has units of years,
convexity has units of years squared.
It's not helpful to try to interpret it in those terms.
However, because the formula is complicated,
it's quite helpful to have a mental shortcut
to know that for a zero-coupon bond,
convexity is approximately its maturity squared.
For the same reasons as setting up a hedge often
uses dollar duration, it's often useful to know the dollar
convexity.
Dollar convexity is standard or effective convexity
multiplied by the bond price.

Also remember that you don't have
to use this formula by hand.
You can use the convexity calculator for much of the math
that you'll be asked to do.

Looking again at a plot of the actual price yield relationship
provides a more intuitive understanding of convexity
and why it can be used in hedging strategies
to create more robust hedges.
The green-shaded area here indicates
the convexity is related to the curvature
of the actual price-yield curve.
So here we have the actual price-yield curve.
It's a convex function because it's inward curved.
And if we had a different bond with more inward curvature,
we would describe it as more convex.
The more convex a bond or fixed income portfolio, the greater
that degree of inward curvature.
Holding duration constant, you can also
see that the greater convexity is a good thing.
Because for any shifts in yields,
the price is higher than in the case of less convexity.
It's important to note that technically that statement is
only true for parallel shifts in the yield curve.
Greater convexity is usually a good thing,
but it's not an arbitrage opportunity.
Well, let's get back to the idea of approximating a price
change with the duration approximation.
Remember that algebra corresponds to sliding down
the tangent line say when yields go from Y* to Y-new here.

So again, we're sliding down the tangent line.
The estimated new price is less than the actual price
by this vertical distance.

If the error gets larger, the more convex the bond
is because there's more inward curvature.
A correction to our formula based on convexity
can be used to increase the accuracy of our estimate,
getting closer to the true new price.
So a convexity correction will pull up our estimate,
but we'll see it actually overshoots a bit.
Some positions exhibit what's called negative convexity.
And mathematically, negative convexity
is the same thing as concavity.
One example is a short bond position.
Remember that a short position always
flips the actual price-yield curve over the x-axis.
Negative convexity also rises in some long positions
such as for callable bonds over some range of yields.
And that's what's pictured here.
That's because as rates fall, the bond
becomes more likely to be called before maturity,
which puts an upper bound on its price appreciation.
We'll return to that when we talk about call options.
What's important to understand here
is that negative convexity is unfavorable for either a long
or a short position because it makes
outcomes worse for any given change in yields,
again, holding all else equal including duration.
So it's moving us down relative to the straight line
or the tangent line.

We just saw graphically that a convexity adjustment
to a duration-based estimate of price changes
can improve that estimate.
The algebra that corresponds to that idea
is given in this equation.

It relates the percentage change in the bond price
to minus the duration times the change
in the yield, the term that we have seen before,
plus a new term, which is adding one
half the convexity times the change in the yield squared.
Some of you might recognize this as a second-order Taylor series
expansion of the equation for the price of a bond.
Going back to an example that's similar to the one we looked
at earlier, let's approximate the percentage price change
for a 25-year 6% coupon bond priced to yield 9% when there's
a 2% increase in its yield.
Using the duration and convexity calculator,
you can verify that the modified duration is 10.62,
and the convexity is 182.92.
Plugging these values into our formula for the percentage
price change produces an estimated decline in price
of 17.58%.
The actual price change is 18.03%,
which is actually pretty close considering
that a 2% change in yields is a really large jump that's
unlikely to occur over any short time period.
This calculation also shows the size of the improvement
from including the convexity correction.
The duration approximation alone implies a 21.24% price drop,
which is more than three percentage points too large.