
INSTRUCTOR: Now that we've covered the basics of duration
and convexity, I'm here with my friendly hedgehog
to turn to hedging strategies that
use duration and convexity.
We'll start by seeing how to set up these hedges using the cash
markets and then see how to get the same sort of protection,
often at a lower cost, with forwards, futures, and swaps.
We can rearrange the equation introduced on slide 27
to approximate how much the price of a bond
will change with a small change in its yield.

This equation for the approximate price change
is the basis for hedging strategies
known as delta hedging and gamma hedging.
Because of that, some of the terms in the equation
are given special names.
The product of duration and price
is often called the hedge ratio.

Earlier, we called this dollar duration.
They are the same.
The product of convexity and price is often called gamma.
That's the same thing as dollar convexity.

Delta hedging in this context refers
to a hedging strategy based just on first-order price
sensitivities.
It involves equating the hedge ratio
of one's assets and liabilities so as
to neutralize the effects of yield changes
on the value of an investor's net position.
Such a portfolio is described as delta neutral.
We saw that duration-based approximation to price changes
is not very accurate for large yield changes.
From a hedging perspective, that implies
that a delta-neutral portfolio is still
exposed to the risk of large yield changes.
To further reduce that risk, a portfolio
can be structured to also be gamma neutral.
A gamma-neutral portfolio is delta neutral,
and it also equates the gammas of the assets and liabilities.
Equating the gammas as well as the hedge ratio
takes into account the convexity of the price-yield relationship
and provides a more robust hedge.
This example is one of my favorites.
It's a little more complex than most of the examples
we've looked at until now, but I like it
a lot because it clearly illustrates
how to set up a delta and gamma hedge
and also what are the choices and trade-offs involved
with doing that.
We'll start by setting up the hedge in several ways
using the cash market, then we'll
compare the various outcomes to draw some general conclusions.
Consider a dealer in corporate bonds
who finds herself at the end of the trading
day with an inventory of $1 billion
in five-year, 6.9% bonds.
Those bonds are priced at par, and the coupon
is paid semi-annually.
Over the course of the day, she might have bought or sold
many other bonds, but these particular bonds
are what's leftover at the day's end.
Well, these corporate bonds are illiquid, and trying
to sell them quickly would entail
a loss that she wants to avoid.
But holding them overnight is risky
because their price could fall if interest rates rise.
An alternative that's cheaper to selling the corporate bonds
is to hedge the risk by instead shorting more liquid Treasury
bonds.
If rates rise, the gain on the Treasury short position
will help offset the loss on the corporate bonds.
The short Treasury position will be sized using a delta or gamma
hedging strategy.
Let's imagine the following liquid treasury bonds are
available for shorting--
a 10-year 8% Treasury priced at $1,109
per $1,000 of face value, or alternatively,
a three-year 6.3% Treasury priced at $1,008.1
per $1,000 face value.
Well, either of these bonds, and in practice,
many other Treasury bonds, could be used to set up the hedge.
We'll start by calculating how much of the 10-year bond
she would need to short, and then we'll
calculate how much of the three-year bond
she'd need to short using our formula for finding
a hedge ratio.
Then we'll evaluate the performance
of the hedge in both cases under the assumption
that yields do rise by 1% overnight on all bonds
and that all positions are closed out the next day.
To answer the question in part A about how much to short
and to set up the hedges, we first
need to calculate the modified duration
of the corporate bond holdings and also of the Treasury bonds
that are candidates for shorting.
Plugging the information for each bond
into our duration and convexity calculator
implies that the long corporate bond position has
a modified duration of 4.1688.
The 10-year Treasury has a modified duration of 7.005,
and the three-year Treasury has a modified duration of 2.7.
The hedge ratio for the five-year corporate bonds
is their value of $1 million multiplied by their modified
duration of 4.1688, which gives a hedge
ratio of $4.1688 million.
If the 10-year Treasury bond is used to hedge,
the amount shorted is such that the hedge ratio of the Treasury
bond is equated to that of the corporate bond, which
means solving for the x in the equation x times 7.005
is equal to $4.1688 million.
We can solve for x to get 593,861,050.
If instead, the three-year treasury bond is used to hedge,
a similar calculation implies a short position
of $1.54 million.
Notice that using the shorter-duration bond to hedge
involves taking a larger position.
That makes a lot of intuitive sense.
The price of the shorter-duration bonds
is less sensitive to yield changes.
Therefore, it requires a larger position and absolute value
to get the same dollar price sensitivity to yield changes.
To evaluate what happens to prices under the hypothetical
that all yields rise by 1% overnight,
it's necessary to use the basic formula relating a bond's price
to its discounted cash flows.
The way it's done on this slide is
to calculate the percentage price changes
for each of the bonds based on the assumed $1,000 face value.
That percentage change is then applied
to the original present value of each of the positions.

Alternatively, you could have solved
for the face value of each bond from the initial hedge ratio
amounts, calculated the corresponding coupon payments,
and then re-discounted the new higher rates.
In either case, the conclusion from the calculations
is that had the dealer not hedged her position,
she would have taken a loss of $40,656
on her corporate bond holdings.
You can see the very good news is that the delta hedge is
quite effective either using the three-year Treasuries
or the 10-year Treasuries.
Adding together the loss on the corporate bonds
and the gain on the treasuries, you
can see on that, she comes out just slightly
behind using the 10-year bond and slightly ahead using
the three-year bond.

What's the reason for the differences here?
Well, as you might have guessed, the differences in outcomes
can be explained by convexity differences.
The 10-year Treasury has a much greater convexity
than the three year treasury, and the convexity
of her long position falls in between that
of the two treasuries.
You might have thought that she would have done better using
the 10-year Treasury because it is more convex,
and convexity is a good thing.
However, you have to remember that whereas greater convexity
is helpful in a long position, the dealer
is shorting the Treasuries.
She's worse off when the short position involves a higher
convexity bond.
The general conclusion we can draw from this
is that a delta hedge will have better results when
the convexity of the long position
is greater in absolute value than the convexity
of the short position.
However, there may be other factors also
that would influence your choice of which bonds
to use to set up a delta hedge.
For instance, in this case, the three-year treasury,
because of its shorter duration, necessitates a much larger
short position.
That could involve additional transactions costs
or make it harder to find a counterparty.
Had the dealer wanted even greater protection
against losses, she could have constructed
a gamma-neutral position that not only matched
the hedge ratios of her long and short positions
but also matched their gammas.
In this example where there's only two different securities
available to use to take the short positions,
there's only one way to set up a gamma hedge.
That will involve transacting in both
of the Treasury securities.
The quantities transacted will be
selected to match the hedge ratio
and also to match the gamma, as shown in these equations.

Here, this involves solving two linear equations
for two unknowns.
And you can see the complete solution
in a write-up on the course web page.

In reality, because there are many bonds that
could be used to set up a gamma hedge,
there would be many ways to implement it.
And as for delta hedging, the choice
between the different possibilities
would depend on factors such as cost and availability.
Now, you may be wondering, if it's
more effective to gamma hedge, why not always do that instead
of just delta hedging?
The answer is that it's more complicated and usually more
expensive to gamma hedge.
So if a delta hedge provides sufficient protection,
it's going to be the easier and cheaper approach.
Now, there's many situations where
a hedge may be required for an extended period of time,
not just overnight.
In such cases, another consideration
is that the hedge will need to be adjusted over time
as rates, and therefore durations, change.
More frequent adjustments of delta hedge
are a substitute for gamma hedging.
That is, frequently adjusting a delta hedge, which is also
known as dynamic hedging, is a substitute for putting
on a more robust gamma hedge that
can be adjusted less frequently for the same amount
of protection.
