
PROFESSOR: It's often more convenient and less
expensive to execute delta and gamma hedging
strategies using derivatives rather than taking
an offsetting position in the cash market.
The logic of hedging with derivatives
is exactly the same as in the example we just saw.
The interest rate sensitivity of the position being hedged
is offset as closely as possible by creating a derivatives
position with an offsetting exposure,
and ideally one where the relative convexity works
in your favor.
So now all you need to learn to be able to set up an interest
rate hedge using the sorts of forwards, futures, and swap
contracts for interest rates that we've discussed
is how to find the duration and convexity of those contracts.
For delta and gamma hedging strategies,
we saw that the relevant duration
concept is dollar duration.
It's straightforward to find the dollar
duration of a forward or futures contract
where the underlying asset is a bond or a portfolio of fixed
income securities.
In that case, the dollar duration
is the product of two terms, first,
the modified or effective duration of the bonds
specified in the contract and second, the prepaid forward
or futures price of the bond specified in the contract.
Recall, too, that the prepaid forward or futures
price is just the present value of the purchase price specified
in the forward or futures contract.
You'll see a detailed example of how to apply
this in the recitation.

This slide summarizes the standard procedure
for using a futures contract for delta hedging interest rate
risk.
As we've discussed before, futures
are an attractive tool for hedging because
of their high liquidity, low transactions costs,
rapid speed of execution, and safety from counterparty risk.
There's relatively few types of fixed income futures contracts
relative to the essentially infinite variety of positions
that traders or financial institutions
might want to hedge.
Fortunately, with strategies based on hedge ratios,
any mismatch in the underlying durations
of the long or short positions are
compensated for by adjusting the size of the hedge.
The first step, then, is to estimate the price sensitivity
of the exposure you want to hedge
with its hedge ratio, which we know
is the product of minus its value
times its modified or effective duration.
Remember that modified an effective duration
are the same things for bonds with safe cash flows,
but they'll differ when they're embedded options in the bond.
And in that case, effective duration
is the relevant measure you should use.

The second step is to determine the hedge ratio for the futures
contract.

The third step is to take a position in the futures
contracts such that the hedge ratio of the cash position
matches the hedge ratio of the futures position.

If the cash exposure is a net long position,
the futures position will be a short one and vice versa.
Delta hedging strategies also are frequently
executed using interest rate swaps.
To find the dollar duration of an interest rate swap,
we use two facts we've already learned.
The first is that from the perspective of the fixed rate
receiver.
At the inception of the swap, it's
equivalent to a portfolio consisting
of a long position and a fixed rate bond
and a short position at a floating rate bond, both priced
to the identical par value.
The second fact is that the dollar duration of a portfolio
is the sum of the dollar duration of its component
parts.
There's one more fact you need to know,
which is that for a pure floating rate bond,
its effective duration is the time
until its next reset date divided by 1 over 1
plus y over k.
That's because it was, as we saw last time,
the price on every reset date is fixed at par.
For the fixed rate bond, the modified or effective duration
can be found in the usual way.
Putting these pieces together, for the fixed rate receiver,
the dollar duration of the swap minus the derivative of price
with respect to the yield is equal to the value of the fixed
rate side of the swap times its modified or effective duration
minus the current value of the floating
side of the swap times its effective duration.
Of course, the duration of the swap from the floating rate
receiver's perspective is just the negative
what it is for the fixed rate receiver.
Let's apply this approach to a concrete example.
Consider a new five-year interest rate
swap offering a fixed rate quoted
at 6% with semi-annual payments and a floating
rate of six-month LIBOR with a notional principal
of $1 million.
Assume that the current six-month LIBOR is also 6%.
So 3% is earned over the next six months.
With this information, we can find the dollar duration
from the perspective of each counterparty, both
the fixed and floating rate payers.
Using the duration and convexity calculator,
a five-year fixed-rate bond with a 6% coupon that's
paid semi-annually and selling it par
has a modified duration of 4.265 years.
The effective duration of the floating rate side
is based on the six months till the next reset date divided
by 1 plus y over 2, so divided by 1.03,
which gives an effective duration of 0.485 years.
The difference, then, is 3.78 years.
Hence the dollar duration of the swap
from the perspective of the fixed rate receiver
is 3.78 times 1 million, or 3.78 million.
The floating rate receiver's position
is just the negative of the fixed rate receiver's position.
And so the dollar duration there is minus 3.78 million.
A potential advantage of hedging with swaps
is the wide variety of durations and convexities
that are available.
Importantly, there's liquidity at longer durations
than there is in many other markets.
We've really covered a lot of important ground this week.
Here are some key takeaways.
The imperative for financial institutions
to manage their interest rate risk
has given rise to the largest derivative markets
in the world.
And duration- and convexity-based or delta gamma
approaches are at the core of most of the hedging strategies
that use these instruments.
A big strength of these strategies
is their flexibility.
There are so many ways to achieve a similar amount
of protection from risk.
We've seen that effective hedges can
be implemented in the cash markets
or with a variety of derivatives.
The choice between the different options
comes down to transactions costs, availability,
and risk tolerance.
To provide some practice setting up
delta hedges with derivatives, in the recitation this week,
you'll revisit the security dealers risk
exposure in example 3.5 and go over
how she can hedge it with a bond futures contract
and also using an interest rate swap.