
PROFESSOR: Let's look at some of the basic objects
and terminology in probability.
A random variable is really a function.
We could really call it a random-valued function
on the sample space.
So the sample space is a set of all events,
or possible outcomes of experiments,
or possible observations that we might have.
And we want to assign numbers to them
so that we can do some math, so that we can do some analytics.
So for example, if we have the abstract outcomes of success
or failure in an experiment, or we flip coins,
and we have heads and tails, or we roll dice,
and we get one of sides to come up,
we are used to assigning numbers to those.
And those numbers are the random variables.
So I've given a couple of examples right here.
In the case of heads and tails, we
might assign them 1 or minus 1.
But there's nothing special about that.
You could pick a different random variable w
and pick different values, 12 and minus 3, if you'd like.
Z is also a common random variable
that we see where we have two outcomes,
and we think of them as being success or failure
of an experiment.
They might be gains or losses on an investment.
Again, two states, we map the two possible states
to two possible numbers.
We could have a large number of states,
and we could combine different kinds of outcome.
We could add two dice together, we
could add a coin flip and a die, and we might also
have continuous outcomes.
So they don't need to be discrete.
What's the probability?
Well, we describe the probability
of an outcome as a number that we
assign to a random variable taking a particular value.
So for example, in the case of a fair coin,
the probability of observing X equals 1 would be 1/2.
For the case of Y equals 2, in the case of our dice,
we know that we would only see that in 1
out of 36 times when both the dice come up
with 1 on one side.
We can compute functions of a random variable as well,
and we'll have more to say about this later on.
But for example, if we take X squared,
the probability of observing X squared equals 1
is 1 because X could be plus 1 or minus 1
with equal probability.
And either way, X squared is equal to 1 and so on.