
PROFESSOR: Now let's look at sums of random variables.
And this is going to open the door
to our construction of discrete time stochastic processes.
We're going to use a basic property for probability,
that if we have random variables,
we can add them together to get new random variables.
We'll see that we'll do everything
in terms of the expectations, which
are going to be easy to compute using linearity.
And you're going to have really interesting behavior
as a function of the number of items in our sum.
So when we have several random variables,
we construct a new one just by adding them together.
So imagine I've got a collection of n random variables--
xyz, X1, X2, X3, X4 to the Xn, and I define their sum.
There are lots of other functions we could talk about.
We could take products.
We could do all kinds of polynomials
or transcendental functions, but we're
going to only be talking about the sum
of basic random variables.
Now in certain cases, we could ask what the full probability
distribution is S, in terms of the probability
distributions for X1, X2, X3 and up through Xn.
They have a definite probability distribution.
So that determines what happens with S.
But in many cases, we don't need to know
everything about S. We just need to know about its moments.
And those are easy.
They're easy because we can use linearity.
What we do is we apply the expectation operator
to the sum, and we see that the expectation of the sum is
the sum of the expectations of the individual X's.
So the full probability distribution
can be quite complicated.
But what we need to do is to get the mean value,
we just add the means of the individual variables.
Now due to the Central Limit Theorem,
this is actually often all we need,
because we get a tremendous amount out of this.
If we n is a large number, then the sum of random variables
is going to converge on a Gaussian random variable.
That's the distribution of S will approach a Gaussian
distribution, regardless of what the X initial distributions
are.
And we'll see that in just a moment in pictures,
and then in a subsequent video, I'll
show you how you can derive that.

But let's take a look first, at where
we might apply this sum of random variables
in financial terms.
So one case is when we look at portfolios.
So suppose we have a portfolio that consists of N assets.
And let's let w represent the weight of asset,
i, within a portfolio.
So i runs 1, 2, 3, 4 through the number of assets we have.
Suppose we have stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial
average-- i would run from 1 through 30
and would be equal to 30.
Let's let r sub i be the return on that asset.
And let's think of it as being a random variable.
So each of the stocks is going to have
an independent probability distribution.
And each probability distribution
has a mu_i which is the expectation of R.
And it's got a variance, sigma i squared, which
is just a variance of the random variable, R_i
So what's a portfolio?
A portfolio is a weighted average of stocks.
So here our weights are not probabilities,
they're capital allocations to a portfolio so the rule
and this is just arithmetic that the return
on a portfolio the simple return on a portfolio in a given
period is the weighted average of the returns
on the individual assets.
So we've got this bilinear form.
We've got a linear combination of the returns--
w1R1 plus w2R2 and so on.
So we have a linear combination of random variables.
So it's not just a sum, it's a weighted average.
What's the expectation of R?
Well, that's the portfolio, mean return.
And the expectation of R using linearity,
is the weighted average of the expectations
of the individual stock returns.
No surprise-- the expected return on the portfolio
is the weighted average of the expected return
of the individual stocks.
So that's a case where we don't know what the full return
distribution is.
But we've related the mean of the portfolio
to the mean of the individual stocks.
What about the variance?
Well, if the variables were uncorrelated,
that would be one thing.
But that is not the case with most financial variables.
And certainly, it's not the case for asset returns.
So let's take a look at what happens
when we compute the variance.
What we'll see as we define the variance of our portfolio,
R_p Remember that R_p is just this weighted average.
So when we take a look at R_p minus mu_p
we can expand that out in terms of our individual stocks
in this way.
And if we expand out the quadratics--
so this is a quadratic.
We expand out all the terms and we
group them together, we get two kinds of terms.
We get diagonal terms.
We get an i with itself gives a set of n terms, w_i squared
times the expectation of R_i minus mu_i quantity squared
plus all the cross terms that come from i not equal to j.
These terms, you'll notice, are a weighting factor,
w_i squared, times the variance of stock, i.
And the cross terms give us for each i not equal to j or twice
for each i less than j, wiwj times the covariance
of R_i and R_j.
And that just comes from expanding
out the polynomial inside the expectation
here, and grouping the terms together.
We can rewrite these two terms in terms of sigma squared.
Sigma i squared is the variance of R_i.
And using our formula for the correlation,
we can relate the covariance to the correlation by noting that
the covariance is just sigma_i sigma_j ,
times the correlation of i with j,
which I've denoted here by rho_ij .
So you notice the structure of the formula that we have.
The return on the portfolio is quadratic.
Excuse me, the variance of the portfolio
is quadratic in the weights.
It has a term in w_i squared times the sigma is squared
for each of the stocks, plus twice w_iw_j, sigma_i sigma_j ,
rho_ij .
So if the stocks were uncorrelated,
we'd only have the first term.
And if the w's were 0, of course, this would vanish.
A couple of special cases of this are worth keeping in mind.
One of them is if the correlations
rho_ij were equal to 0, then we see we have the first term.
But notice that it becomes the sum of a bunch of squares.
On the other hand, if rho_ij in this expression,
if these were all equal to 1, then you
notice that this becomes an expression
for a perfect square.
If rho_ij is equal to 1, then the variance of the portfolio
is the weighted average squared.
So it's the square of the sum instead
of the sum of the squares.
Finally if the correlation were 0
and everything were the same-- all the stocks were the same.
They all had the same volatility.
They all had the same variance.
And the portfolio were equal weighted, what would we see?
Well, if the portfolio is equal weighted,
each stock will have weight 1/n.
If the sigmas are all equal, we can give them the name.
If the sigma i's are all equal, let's call it sigma 0.
And now, this formula here, if we bring it down and substitute
those in, we see it as a portfolio value becomes
sigma 0 squared divided by n.
That is we've got 1 over n squared.
But there are n identical terms in the sum.
So we get sigma 0 squared over n,
which means that the volatility of the portfolio
is proportional to 1 over square root of n.
That means that as n gets large, the volatility in the portfolio
goes down.
And this is the basic idea behind portfolio
diversification.