
PROFESSOR: Without further ado, let's begin with problem 1.
Problem 1 has a long setup, so do bear with me.
A financial firm is offering a synthetic zero-coupon
puttable and convertible bond on the ABC Company.
It works in the following way.
First, the bond has a promised principal payment
of $1,000 three periods from now.
Second, at any time after the first period,
the holder of the bond could either
exchange it for one share of the ABC stock--
that's the convertible option--
or give it back to the securities firm
in return for a payment of $600.
That's the putable option.
The securities firm has set aside four shares of ABC stock
to serve as collateral for each synthetic convertible.
In particular, the firm can at any time
fulfill its entire obligation and be required
to make no other payments by giving
to the holder of the putable convertible full ownership
of the four shares of the stock.
Over each period, the total rate of return on holding ABC stock
will be either 100% or -50%.
At the end of each period, the stock
will pay one fifth of its pre-dividend value as a cash
dividend to the investor who held
the stock during that period.
The remaining 80% of the pre-dividend value
will then be the ex-dividend stock price at which one
can purchase stock to hold over the following period
or sell the stock received from either conversion or default.
In other words, over each period,
the ex-dividend stock price will either increase by 60%
or decrease by 60%, and that's important.
By reinvesting dividends, an investor
owning one share at the beginning of a period
will own 1.25 shares at the end of the period.
The current ex-dividend stock price is $1,000,
and the interest rate is 10% per period.
The quoted price of a synthetic putable convertible
is also $1,000.
If the financial firm fully hedges its position,
what will be its realized profit on each bond sold?
We're going to use a binomial tree risk-neutral pricing model
in order to solve this problem.
I know we threw a lot of information at you there,
so I've taken the liberty of describing the possible paths
for ABC stock over the next three periods
in the diagram on the slide.
How did I get these payoffs?
Well, recall that the stock price ex-dividend
will either increase by 60% or decrease
by 60% in consecutive periods.

We'll explain in a little bit where
the payoffs on this final column come from but first, as always,
let's work backwards through the binomial tree.
In particular, if the stock price three periods from now--
that is, at the maturity date--
is either $4,096 or $1,024, then bondholders
will certainly choose to convert their bond to a stock,
as the principal payment of the bond is only $1,000.
If instead the stock price on the maturity date is $256,
then bondholders will neither choose
to convert the bond to a stock nor put it.
And the financial firm will instead
have to pay those bondholders the principal amount of $1,000.
Finally, if the stock price is $64,
the financial firm will settle its obligation
to the bondholders by giving them
the four shares of the stock held as the collateral.
The column to the right of the diagram on that binomial tree
reports the final payoffs to the bondholders
at each of the four nodes at the maturity date:
4,096, 1,024, 1,000, or 256.
Now that we found the value of the putable convertible
at the terminal nodes of the binomial tree,
what will be its value at all the other nodes of the tree?
Well, like we've seen before in this class,
we can find the value of the putable convertible
by applying the fundamental valuation equation
to obtain the value of the bond if it's held for one more
period on the tree.
This value must then be compared with the value generated
by immediate conversion, that is,
converting the bond to its stock, putting the bond,
or immediately forfeiting the collateral
by the financial firm.
The final value assigned at each node on the tree
must reflect the optimal behavior by both bondholders
and the financial firm relative to the choices
available to them at the time.
To be more specific, let's let V,
which is a function of S and n, be the value of the bond when
the stock price is S and there are n periods until maturity.
We can solve for the risk-neutral probability
of an up move, which we'll call q*, as follows.
1000, which is the initial price of the stock,
is equal to 2000 times q* plus 500 times 1 minus q* divided
by 1.1, which yields q* equals 0.4,
or 40% for the risk-neutral probability of an up move.
We got the numbers 2000 and 500 because, as you recall,
the total rate of return on holding the ABC stock
will be either 100% or -50% over each period.

Dividing by 1.1 just reflects the fact
that the risk-free rate of interest is 10% each period.
Let's solve for the value of the putable convertible
when n equals 1.
That is, when there is one period remaining
until maturity.
In particular, on the binomial tree diagram,
we're looking at the three nodes corresponding to the stock
price of 2560, 640, and 160.
The value of the putable convertible
at the node when n equals 1 and the stock price is 2560
is given by the minimum of two different terms.
The first term is equal to four times the stock
price of that node, which would be
the payoff to the bondholders if the financial firm were
to default on its obligations.
The second term is itself the maximum
of three different terms.
The first, 2560, is the payoff to the bondholders
if they convert their bond to a stock.
The second, 600, is the payoff to the bondholders
if they put the bond and receive 600.
The third term is the payoff to the bondholders
if they keep the bond, which itself
is given by the fundamental valuation equation, which
is 0.4, the probability of an up move
in the risk-neutral measure, times the price
of the stock in the up node relative to the 2560 stock
node at time t equals 1, plus the risk-neutral probability
of a down move, times the price of a stock
in the subsequent down node of 1024,
discounted at the risk-free rate of 10%.

Solving this minimization problem,
we see that the value of the putable convertible
is 2560 at n equals 1.
Similar calculations for the node when the stock price is
640 and n equals 1, and 160 at n equals 1,
yield a value of 917.82 and 600, respectively.
Thus, looking at the first node here,
we see that the bond will be converted
to a stock at the node of the tree where S equals 2560.
The put will be exercised when S equals 160,
this bottom node here.
And the bond will be neither converted nor put when
S equals 640, this node here.
We can follow a similar procedure
to find the value of the putable convertible when n equals 2.
That is, when there are two periods remaining to maturity.
On the binomial tree diagram, that
corresponds to the two nodes where the stock price is either
1600 or 400.
For the node when the stock price is equal to 1600,
the value of the putable convertible
will be equal to, again, the minimum of two terms.
The first term, four times 1600, is the payoff
to the bondholders if the firm is
unable to meet its obligations.
The second term is itself the maximum of three terms.
1600, which is the payoff to the bondholders
if they convert their bond to a stock at that node,
600, which is again the payoff to the bondholders
if they put the bond, and the last term,
which is given by the fundamental valuation
equation, which is equal to 0.4, the risk-neutral probability
of an up move to the subsequent node,
times the price of the stock in the subsequent up node of 2560,
plus 0.6, the risk-neutral probability of a down move,
times the value of the putable convertible
in the subsequent down node, which
we found on the previous slide to be equal to 917.82.
Discount that at the risk-free rate,
solve this minimization problem, and we
see that the value of the putable convertible,
at the node where the stock price is equal to 1600,
at n equals 2, is 1600.
A similar exercise can be used to find
the value of the putable convertible
at the node when the stock price is equal to 400 and n
equals 2, which is equal to 661.025.
Thus, the bond will be converted to a stock
at the node of the tree where S equals 1600,
this top node here, and the bond will neither be converted
nor put when the stock price is equal to 400,
this bottom node here.
OK, just one more step.
Remember, the initial price of the stock is equal to 1000.
So we can solve for the value of the putable convertible bond
at the initial node of the tree as follows.
The value of the putable convertible bond
is given by the fundamental valuation equation to be 0.4,
the risk-neutral probability of an up move, times 1600, which,
as we saw in the previous slide, is
the value of the putable convertible bond in the up
node at n equals 2, plus 0.6, risk-neutral probability
of a down move, times 660.025, which,
again, as we saw on the previous slide,
is the value of the putable convertible bond
in the down node at n equals 2.
Discount that the risk-free rate,
we get that the value of the putable convertible bond
is 942.3771.
In other words, if the financial firm fully hedges its position,
its realized profit on each bond sold
will be 1000 minus 942.3771, which
is roughly equal to $57.6229.
