
PROFESSOR: All right, that does it for problem one.
Let's move on to problem two.
In problem two, we are asked to estimate the value of a new six
month European-style arithmetic average price call option
on a non-dividend paying stock.
The initial stock price is $30.
The strike price is $30.
The risk-free rate is 5%.
And the stock price's volatility is 30%.
In part A, we are asked to perform this estimation
by writing a program to run a Monte Carlo
simulation to estimate the price of the option.
Use 5,000 stochastic paths for the risk neutral representation
of the evolution of stock prices assuming log-normality,
drawing innovations from a normal distribution,
and with a time step, h, equal to 1 month.
Before performing the Monte Carlo simulation,
let's first see if we can derive a closed-form expression
for the value of the average price call option.
Since this material is admittedly more advanced
than what we usually see in lecture,
feel free to skip directly to the Monte Carlo simulation
if desired.

The options payoff here is going to depend on the arithmetic
average of the price of the underlying stock
throughout the life of the option.
In particular, the payoff is the maximum of 0
and the average price of the stock, S sub average,
minus the strike price.
Under the assumption that the average price of the stock
is log-normally distributed, the average price call
can be valued using a similar formula
to the one we've used to price a regular European call option.
Suppose M sub 1 and M sub 2 are the first two
moments of the average price of the stock, which recall,
is log-normally distributed.
The first two moments correspond to the mean and the volatility
of that distribution.
The value of the average price call
is given by Black's model, equation one here.
This is identical to the equation
we saw for Black's model in the last recitation.
However, now, the forward, or futures, price of the option
is equal to the first moment of the log-normal distribution
of the average stock price.
And similarly, the volatility of the forward or futures price
is equal to 1 over t times the natural log
of the second moment divided by the first moment squared,
that equation at the bottom of the slide.
Assuming that the average is calculated continuously,
then we get the following two expressions
for the first and second moments of the log-normal distribution
of our average stock price.
These expressions are not too intuitive.
So we'll just say that if we plug
in the risk free rate of 5%, q, the dividend yield of 0
since is a non-dividend paying stock, our volatility, sigma,
of 30%, our time to maturity, 0.5 for six months,
the initial stock price of 30, and the strike price of 30
to the expressions for M1 and M2 above,
we get that the first moment, M1 is equal to 30.378.
And the second moment is equal to 936.9.
Consequently, the volatility of F, sigma squared sub F,
is equal to 1 over t times the natural log
of M2 divided by M1 squared, which is equal to 17.41.
Finally, from equation one on the previous slide,
we can find the value of the average price call as follows--
the exponential of the negative risk
free rate, expressed as a decimal,
times 0.5, the time to maturity, times 30.378 and 1 times N
of d1, which in this case is 0.163, minus 30,
which in this case is the strike price times N of d2,
which is equal to $1.64.
Now that we've seen how we can derive an analytical expression
for the value of the average price call option using Black's
model, let's see how we can use Monte Carlo in order
to find a numerical approximation of the value.
In particular, we can simulate the log-normal stock price
process under the risk neutral representation using
the following algorithm: the stock price at time t plus some
time step, h --
or in this case, the time step is equal to 1 over 12 for one
month --
is equal to the current stock price times the exponential
of the difference between the risk free rate, r, and sigma
squared divided by 2 times the time step plus sigma times
the square root of h times epsilon
where epsilon is an independent and identically
distributed standard normal increment.
After generating 5,000 different paths for the stock price using
this algorithm, we can calculate the payoff on each path i
as follows--
Vi, the payoff on each path, is equal to the maximum
of two different terms.
The first is the average of the stock price over the six months
for that path i minus the strike price, K. The second term
is zero.

Finally, after calculating the payoff on each path i,
we can find the value of the average price call
by discounting the average payoff over all the paths i
where there are 5,000 of them by the exponential
of negative 0.5, the risk free rate, times 0.5,
the time to maturity of the option.
For time step h equals the 1/12, you
should find that the value of the average price call option
is roughly equal to $1.89.
Note that this is very close to the analytical result of $1.64
that we derived above using Black's model.
On the next slide, I have some example R code that shows you
how to numerically do this.
You don't need to know how to program in R in order
to understand the code at a high level.
In the first part of the code, I'm
merely setting up the parameters necessary in order
to perform the Monte Carlo simulation.
In particular, I'm setting number
of simulated paths, the length of the time step,
the length of maturity of the option,
the initial value of the stock, the volatility of the stock,
the risk free rate, the strike price,
and a vector that collects the payoff of the option along each
of the simulated stock price paths.
The second part of the code implements a for loop.
Looping over each of the individual stock price paths,
I'm going to simulate a log-normal distribution
for the stock price over that path
and then calculate the value of the option
as the maximum of the difference between the average stock
price over that path and the strike price and 0.
The final line of the code merely
implements the formula to calculate
the value of the average price call option
that we saw on the previous slide, this one here.
OK.
Part B is asking us to repeat that Monte Carlo exercise,
but now setting the time step h equal to 1 week
as opposed to one month, assuming here
that six months is equal to 26 weeks,
or equivalently, that there are 52 weeks in a year.
The R code that I provide below is almost identical to the R
code that we just saw.
Only now, the time step h is equal to 1 over 52 instead of 1
over 12.
The one thing to notice that is that with the smaller time
step, the simulated value of the average price
call of $1.66 at the bottom of the slide
is nearly identical to the analytical result of $1.64.
This makes sense.
The analytical result was a continuous time result
from Black's model.
As we shrink the value of the time step,
making it smaller and smaller, from one month to one week,
we're getting closer to that continuous time approximation.
Finally, in part C, we are asked that if we use the same Monte
Carlo simulation of stock prices as we
did in part B, what would be the price of a knock-in call
option with a strike price of $30 and a barrier level of $35?

The first thing to do is to recall that a knock-in call
option comes into existence when the stock price reaches
its barrier level, in this case $35, before expiration.
Using the same algorithm to simulate the log-normal stock
price process as we did in part B,
in particular with the time step h equal to 1 over 52 for one
week, we can simulate the payoff of the knock-in call
on a particular stochastic path as the maximum
of the difference between the stock price at maturity
and the strike price, K, and 0 if the stock price reaches its
barrier level of $35.00 and 0 otherwise.
The R code on the next slide is going
to have the implementation of this Monte Carlo simulation.
Ultimately, the price of the knock-in call
will be estimated to be $2.65.
The code is incredibly similar to the code
that we saw for parts A and part B. Only this time,
we have an extra parameter, B, for the $35 barrier level
of the knock-in call option.
And at the end of our for loop, we have a condition.
So if the maximum price of the stock along the simulated
stochastic path is greater than the barrier level,
then we calculate the value of the call option as we have
before --
the maximum of the difference between the average price
of the stock along its path and the strike price, K, and 0.
Otherwise, if the maximum value of the stock
price along its simulated path is not
greater than the barrier level, then the value of the option
will be worthless.