
PROFESSOR: Without further ado, let's
begin by reviewing some options strategies.
As mentioned by Professor Lucas during the week four lecture,
a bull spread is an options trading strategy
designed to profit from the rise in the price of a stock--
hence "bull" rather than "bear."
In the lecture notes, we saw an example
of a bull call spread, which involved
the simultaneous purchase and sale of call options
with different strike prices.
In this case, an investor pays money upfront and profits later
when the call options expire.

Well, we could have easily have used a bull put spread, which
instead involves the simultaneous purchase
and sale of put options.
Specifically, in a bull put spread,
the investor purchases one out-of-the-money put option
with strike price K1, and sells an in-the-money put option with
strike price K2, where K2 is greater than K1.
Recall, on the other hand, that a bear spread involves selling
out-of-the-money put option with strike price K1 and purchasing
an in-the-money put option with strike price K2,
where K2 is greater than K1.
A bear spread is a bet that the stock price will fall,
as opposed to a bull spread, which is a bet that the stock
price will increase.
Thus, a bull put spread has payoffs
like that of a short position in a bear spread.
But in order to yield the same payoff as the bull call spread,
a bull put spread also involves, in addition
to the short position in the bear spread,
the simultaneous purchase of a zero coupon bond with face
value equal to K2 minus K1.
Why is this the case?
Well, recall from put-call parity
that given the price of a European call option,
we can always find the price of an equivalent European put
option as follows in the equation below.
On the left-hand side, Put is the price of the European put
option, S0 is the spot price of the underlying stock
at the initiation of the put or call option,
Call is the price of the call option, and this last term--
e to the negative r times t times k--
is the price of a zero coupon bond with face value
K and interest rate r.
In other words, the payoff of a portfolio consisting
of a call option and a zero coupon bond
with face value K and interest rate
r, the right-hand side of this equation,
is the same as that of a portfolio consisting
of a put option and the underlying stock,
the left-hand side of the equation.
The figure below displays the payoff
of the bull put spread as a function
of the underlying stock price and maturity.
To reiterate, the payoff of the bull put spread, this dark,
black line, is the sum of the payoff of a long position
in the out-of-the-money put, a long position in a bond with
face value K2 minus K1, and a short position
in the in-the-money put option.
In addition to the bull spread, one of the other options
trading strategies that Professor Lucas mentioned
during the week four lecture is the butterfly spread.
Recall that a butterfly spread is a trading strategy that
combines bull and bear spreads to create
a market-neutral position with capped profits and losses.
In the week four lecture, we saw how
to create a butterfly spread using a combination of four
call options.
Equivalently, we can construct the same butterfly
spread using a combination of four put options.
The four options are first, a long position in one
put option with strike price K0, second, a short position in two
put options with strike price K1 and third,
a long position in one put option with strike price K2
where K0 is less than K1 which in turn is less than K2,
and K1 is equal to the average of the strike prices K0 and K2.
Specifically, the above strategy is a long put butterfly spread
created by buying one put with a lower strike price, K0,
selling two at-the-money puts with strike price, K1,
and buying one put with a higher strike price, K2.
This position is going to achieve its maximum payoff when
the underlying stock price remains
at the strike price, K1, of the intermediate options.
The figure below displays the payoff
of the long put butterfly spread as a function
of the underlying stock price and maturity.
To reiterate, the payoff of the long put butterfly spread
is composed of the payoffs of the two long positions
in the put options with strike price K0 and K2,
and the payoff of the short position in two
put options with strike price K1.
Notice we get the same dark, black, butterfly spread payoff
as we did in the long call butterfly spread discussed
in the week four lecture notes.
Now hypothetically, what would happen
if we reverse the positions in the long put butterfly spread?
In particular, say we enter into the following three positions--
first, a short position in one put option
with strike price, K0, second, a long position
in two put options with strike price, K1, and third,
a short position in one option with strike price, K2,
where K0, K1, and K2 are defined as they were above.
The payoff from this strategy will
look very similar to the payoff from the long put butterfly
spread, but instead, it's flipped
about the horizontal axis in the figure we just saw.
So in particular, this dark, black line,
instead of peaking at the strike price, K1,
will have a decline at the strike price of K1.

This strategy is referred to as a "short put butterfly spread,"
and it's going to realize its maximum payoff when
the price of the underlying stock
is either above the upper strike price
or below the lower strike price at the maturity date.
In other words, entering into a short put butterfly spread
is a good idea when you expect the volatility of the stock
price to increase, implying a higher likelihood
that the stock price moves beyond the range of strike
prices of the butterfly.
In other words, a short put butterfly spread
is a bet on higher volatility of the stock price.