
PROFESSOR: OK, now that we reviewed some popular options
strategies, let's review risk-neutral pricing.
Recall from the week 4 lecture that there
are two main conceptual frameworks for pricing
derivative securities.
The first is replicating portfolios
and the second is risk-neutral pricing.
What is risk-neutral pricing?
Well, risk-neutral, pricing states that the price of any
derivative security is equal to the expectation of its
discounted future payoffs, where the expectation is computed
using the so-called risk-neutral probabilities that assume that
investors are risk-neutral --
that is not risk averse --
and discounting is at the risk-free rate.
In particular, the price of the derivative security is equal
to the risk-neutral expectation, E*,
of the payoff of the security at maturity date,
T discounted at the risk-free rate, r.
In the lecture notes, we saw an example
of how risk-neutral pricing could
be used to find the price of a call option.
Can we similarly use risk-neutral pricing
to find the price of a put option?
Suppose that the price of the stock evolves as follows.
In the initial node at T equals 0, the stock price is 50.
In the two subsequent nodes at T equals 1,
the stock price is 70 in the up node and 35 in the down node.
Assume that the risk-free rate is 11%.
Using risk-neutral pricing, what would
be the price of a put option on the stock with maturity,
T equals 1 and strike price, K equals 50?
As a first step, we can find the risk-neutral probability,
call it q*, that the up node occurs at T equals 1
as follows.
S0, the initial stock price is equal to q*,
the risk-neutral probability that the up node occurs at time
T equals 1, times S1,u, the stock price in the up node at T
equals 1 discounted at the risk-free rate,
plus the risk-neutral probability that the down node
occurs at T equals 1, 1 minus q* times the stock price
in the down node at T equals 1, S1,d discounted
at the risk-free rate.
Solving that equation for q*, we see that the risk-neutral
probability is equal to the initial stock price S0 times e
to the power of r times t minus the stock price in the down
node at T equals 1, S1,d, divided by the difference
in the stock prices in the up node and the down node.
Plugging in for the value of the initial stock price a time
T equals 0 of 50, the value of the stock at time T
equals 1 in the down of 35, the value of the stock at time T
equals 1 in the up node of 70, the risk-free rate of 11%
expressed as a decimal, and the maturity of the put option at T
equals 1 into equation 1 for the risk-neutral probability.
We see that the risk-neutral probability
of the up node occurring at time T
equals 1 is equal to 0.5947, or 59.47%.
According to the diagram provided,
the payoff of the put option is equal to 0
in the up node at time T equals 1,
and the maximum of the difference between the strike
price of the put option, K, and the stock
price in the down node at time T equals 1,
and 0, which is equal to 15, in the down node.
Finally, we can compute the price of the put option
by simply applying the risk-neutral pricing formula.
Recall that the price of the put option is equal
to the expectation of its payoff according to the risk-neutral
measure E*, discounted at the risk-free rate,
which is equal to e to the negative 0.11 times
the risk-neutral probability q* of an up node at time T equals
1 times the payoff of the put option in the up node a time T
equals 1, which is 0, plus the risk-neutral probability
of the down node at time T equals 1, 1 minus q*,
times the payoff of the put option in the down node of 15,
which equals 5.4462.
We said that risk-neutral pricing
could be used to price any derivative,
not just call and put options.
One example of a derivative that we've seen before in this class
is a forward contract.
Recall that a forward contract is an agreement between two
parties to either buy or sell an underlying asset on an agreed
upon date and price.
In the week 1 lecture, we saw that the forward price
of a non-dividend paying stock is given
by the following equation.
F0 T, which is the forward price for a contract that
expires at maturity date, T is equal to the current price
of the stock, S sub 0, times e to the r times T. Can
we derive the same formula using risk-neutral pricing instead?
The first thing to notice is that the profit at maturity
date, T from a long position in the forward contract
is given by the difference between the stock price
at maturity date T, ST and the forward price,
F0 T. Since it costs nothing to enter
into the forward contract, the value of this contract
must be equal to 0 at its initiation.
Thus, the risk-neutral expectation
of the profit from a long position
in the forward contract discounted
at the risk-free rate must be equal to 0.
Rearranging this equation, we see that the forward price
is equal to the risk-neutral expectation of the stock
price at the maturity date, T. Recall
that in a risk-neutral world, the return on any stock
is equal to the risk-free rate.
In the case of a non-dividend paying stock,
this implies that the initial price of the stock as 0
is equal to the risk-neutral expectation of the stock price
at date T, discounted at the risk-free rate.
Combining these two equations, we
arrive at the exact same expression
for the forward price of a non-dividend paying stock
as we did in the week 1 lecture.
From the first equation, we know that the forward price is
equal to the risk-neutral expectation of the stock
price at the maturity date T. And by rearranging
the second equation, bringing the exponential of negative r
times T to the other side, we know
that the risk-neutral expectation of the stock
price of maturity date T is equal to the current value
of the stock price, S0 times e to the r times T.
The big picture takeaway here is that the forward price
of the stock is the risk-neutral expectation of the underlying
asset value at time T.
