PROFESSOR: Now that we've reviewed risk-neutral pricing,
let's close the recitation by reviewing
dynamic replication or the replicating portfolio approach.
As discussed by Professor Lucas in the week 4 lecture,
the replicating portfolio approach to pricing an option
should imply the exact same price
as the risk-neutral pricing approach that we just reviewed.
In a multi-period setting, however,
constructing the replicating portfolio
may be a cumbersome procedure.
As an example, consider a stock price
that evolves according to the binomial tree below.
At time T equals 0, the stock price is $50.
At time T equals 1, the stock price
is $70 in the up node and $35 in the down node.
And now we add a third period, time T
equals 2, where the stock price is $100 in the up-up node,
50 in either the up-down or the down-up node,
or 25 in the down-down node.
Using the replicating portfolio approach,
we can price a call option with maturity,
T equals 2 and strike price, K equals $50 in five steps.
In the first step, determine the payoffs
from the call option at each node of the tree at t
equals 2, that is, working backwards.
Well, let C2,uu be the payoff of the call option in the up-up
node at time T equals 2, C2,ud which is the same as C2,du be
the payoffs in the up-down and down-up nodes,
and C2,dd be the payoff in the down-down node.
Since the strike price of the call option is $50,
the payoff of the call option in the up-up node is $50.
In the up-down or down-up node, it's $0.
And similarly, in the down-down node, it's also $0.
In step 2, we can find the position delta
to invest in stocks in our replicating portfolio
at each node of the tree at T equals 1.
At T equals 1, the delta in the up node, which is Delta 1,u,
is equal to the difference between the payoff of the call
option in the up-up node and the payoff of the call option
in the up-down node, divided by the price of the stock at time
T equals 2 in the up-up node and the price of the stock at time
T equals 2 in the up-down node, which is equal to 50 minus 0
divided by 100 minus 50, which is equal to 1 in the up node.
So we invest all of our replicating portfolio in stocks
at time T equals 1 in the up node.
A similar calculation for delta at time T
equals 1 in the down node shows that our delta is
equal to 0 in the down node.
So we invest none of our portfolio in stocks
in the down node at time T equals 1.
In step 3, we can find the amount
of risk-free bonds in our replicating portfolio
at each node of the tree at time T equals 1.
We'll recall from the week 4 lecture notes
that once we know the deltas at time T equals 1 in both the
up node and the down node, it's very easy
to compute the amount of risk-free bonds
that we invest in.
For example, in the up node at time T equals 1,
the number of risk-free bonds that we purchase is
equal to the negative of the exponential
of the negative risk-free rate times the sum of the negative
of the value of the call option at time
T equals 2 in the up-up node plus the delta at time T
equals 1 in the up node times the stock price at time T
equals 2 in the up-up node.
This is like the dollar size of our position
in the stock at time T equals 1 in the up node, which, overall,
equals negative 44.7917 in the up node at time T equals 1.
That is a short position of 44.7917 units
in the risk-free bond at time T equals 1 in the up node,
and a similar calculation shows that we
invest nothing in risk-free bonds in the down node at time
T equals 1.
In step 4, we can find the value of a replicating portfolio
at each node of the tree at time T
equals 1, which, by no-arbitrage, is also
the value of the call option at each node.
Well, the value of the replicating portfolio
slash call option at time T equals
1, for instance for the up node, is just
the sum of the value of our stock portfolio at time
T equals 1 plus the value of our bond portfolio at time
T equals 1 in the up node, which is equal to 25.2083.
A similar calculation for the down node
shows that the value of the replicating portfolio or call
option in the down node at time T equals 1 is equal to $0.
There were certainly a lot of equations
to keep track of in the first four steps.
So an easy way of summarizing what we've done so far
is to replicate the binomial tree.
But now, in addition to the value
of the stock at each node, I've also
included the delta of the replicating portfolio
at each node, the value of the investment
in the risk-free bonds at each node,
and, finally, the value of the call option or replicating
portfolio at each node at both T equals 1 and T equals 2.
In our fifth and final step, we simply repeat steps 2
through 4 for the T equals 0 node.
In other words, we find the delta
of our replicating portfolio for the T equals 0 node,
we find our investment in risk-free bonds
of our replicating portfolio for the T equals 0 node,
and we find the value of our replicating portfolio for the T
equals 0 node, equivalently, the value of our call option,
by using the fact that the value of the call option at time T
equals 1 in the up node is equal to 25.2083 and is equal to 0
in the down node at time T equals 1.
The binomial tree below summarizes step 5.
In particular, the delta at time T equals 0 is equal to 0.7202.
The investment in risk-free bonds at time T
equals 0 is equal to negative 22.5824.
That is, we short 22.5824 of risk-free bonds
in a replicating portfolio.
And the value of a replicating portfolio at time T
equals 0, equivalently, the value of our call option,
is equal to 13.4294.
Well, that wraps up week 4 recitation.
Thank you everyone for coming, and I look forward
to seeing all of you next week.