[MUSIC PLAYING]
EGOR MATVEYEV: Hello, everyone.
And welcome to mathematical methods
for quantitative finance.
This course is part of a MIT's MicroMasters Program
in Finance.
To the learners who have taken other courses in this series,
welcome back.
To the learners who are joining us for the first time,
I would like to welcome you to our MicroMasters program.
My name is Egor Matveyev.
I'm the executive director of the MicroMasters program
and a faculty member of the Finance Group at MIT Sloan
School of Management.
I joined the Finance Group at MIT Sloan four years ago.
I have taught various finance courses in our MBA,
master's in finance, and MBA Sloan Fellows program.
The scope of my teaching includes introductory classes
to MBA students and Sloan Fellows,
as well as an advanced elective in corporate finance.
I also teach MIT Sloan's action learning course
in corporate finance and investment banking.
My academic research covers areas of corporate finance,
corporate governance, organizational economics,
and asset management with a particular focus
on asset management of nonprofit foundations and endowments.
In this video, I would like to give you
an overview of the MicroMasters Program in Finance.
Our program consists of five courses--
Mathematical Methods for Quantitative Finance,
Foundations of Modern Finance parts I and II,
Financial Accounting, and Derivatives Markets.
By successfully completing all five courses,
you will earn the MicroMasters credential in finance from MIT.
How does completing the MicroMasters program in finance
benefit you?
First, it can be used to advance your career.
All of our courses have the same rigorous content
that we teach to our in-resident students at MIT Sloan.
In all our courses, we have developed
individual proctored exams that allow us to test your knowledge
and allows you to show your understanding of the subject.
Our testing process is rigorous and complies
with our internal practices for MIT students.
Earning our credential will allow
you to demonstrate your financial knowledge
and your skills at the level of the MIT Sloan.
Second, our MicroMasters credential
can be a first step in earning a master's degree
in finance, either at MIT or at our pathway universities.
If you're currently a sophomore in an undergraduate program,
starting our MicroMasters program now
would allow you to complete the program
by the beginning of your senior year,
right in time for your applications
to master's programs.
At MIT Sloan School of Management,
learners who earn the MicroMasters credential
in finance are eligible to receive credit for four courses
upon acceptance into the program.
This would allow you to waive the summer term
and accelerate program completion.
The list of pathway universities that accept our MicroMasters
credential is growing and is available on our website.
Even if you are not currently interested in a full master's
degree, our MicroMasters credential
may give you an edge in the labor market,
as our committee of credential holders
grows and more employers become familiar
with the rigor of our content and testing.
You're also welcome to take our individual courses.
For example, if you already have a strong general foundation
in finance and you would like to deepen
your understanding of derivative securities and markets,
you can take our derivatives course
and earn a certificate specifically for that course.