
PAUL MENDE: Welcome to 15.455x, Mathematical Methods
of Quantitative Finance.
I'm Paul Mende, and I'm your instructor for this course.
The main topics that we cover are probability, time series
models, discrete-time stochastic processes,
continuous-time processes, linear algebra,
and optimization.
Our approach in this course is to develop mathematical methods
that are applied in finance.
We're oriented toward practical and innovative problem solving.
So we'd like you to understand where the ideas come from,
how to use them, not only in standard situations,
but in novel ones, where maybe some
of the standard assumptions don't apply.
We'll survey the key ideas and tools and methods
in each of these areas.
And we'll provide a foundation for applications
in industry and research and for further study,
depending on where you are in your career
and where you are in your studies.
Learning in the class is very much hands on.
You'll be doing examples, you'll be doing problems,
you'll be doing applications.
And mostly, you should be asking questions all the time.
Where does this apply?
What do the results mean?
What are some counterexamples?
How do we generalize?
We begin with probability because
of the basic observation that financial data
is noisy and financial data--
excuse me, financial decisions, more generally,
are characterized by uncertainty.
So we need probability.
Probability is the language of uncertainty.
And we want to ultimately be describing an uncertain world
and making good decisions under uncertain conditions.
So we begin with the basic review
of probability and a few key ideas
that we'll be building on to describe how events unfold
in a sometimes noisy world.
Look at discrete-time stochastic processes
that characterize the evolution of random variables
to describe financial and econometric quantities.
We want to think about the entire past, present,
and future trajectory of different quantities
of interest.
So we'll be developing some specific time series
models that find a variety of applications.
We'll be looking at numerical, as well as analytical,
techniques to solving closed form, to solve numerically.
We'll see how to estimate parameters
and how to identify what might be the appropriate model
for different situations.
We'll then take a look at things in continuous time,
and we'll see it's much more interesting
than simply your ordinary delta t goes to 0 limit.
We'll see stochastic processes become fractals,
and we need a whole new calculus, the ito calculus,
to describe stochastic financial variables.
So we'll develop that.
And then we'll see how we can go from these stochastic equations
back to more familiar partial differential equations
and look at some of the key equations that
are important in finance and some that have application
to important areas, such as derivative pricing,
option pricing, and so on.
We'll look at linear algebra, because pricing relationships
and many other relationships among financial variables
are linear.
And linear algebra captures the essential relationships
and constraints among financial quantities
to identify what are independent drivers, to identify
how many independent securities might be in a market,
and we'll look at applications, such as market completeness,
security replication, and arbitrage.
Finally, we'll look at optimization.
Whether it's trading, investments,
or other kind of decision making under uncertainty,
we'd like to take the best action or find the best policy.
We often have to do so in the presence not only of
uncertainty, but constraints.
So we'll take a look at constrained optimization
in single and multivariate settings,
in a single period settings, and over multiple time horizons.