[MUSIC PLAYING]
EGOR MATVEYEV: In this video, I would
like to talk more specifically about the structure
of this course.
It is an instructor-based course,
and we will be releasing content each Wednesday
at 15:00 hours, Coordinated Universal Time or UTC.
Each week's content will have three components-- lectures,
recitations, and problem sets.
Lecture videos deliver the main content
and introduce you to major concepts.
We encourage you to engage with the concept checks that
accompany the lectures.
We have received feedback from our learners
that these are a useful learning tool,
and we hope that they help you understand the material
of each learning module.
Recitations are designed to bridge the gap between lectures
and problem sets.
The recitation content will help you understand and apply
the relevant lecture concepts and will
help you to solidify your understanding of the material.
Problem sets in this course are due each Wednesday
at 15:00 hours UTC.
You have exactly one week to finish problem sets.
As a matter of policy, homework deadlines will not be extended.
We do recognize, however, that circumstances
can arise that prevent you from meeting every single deadline,
and we want to offer some flexibility.
Therefore, we will drop your lowest homework score
at the end of the course.
We would like to emphasize the importance
of working diligently and consistently
throughout the course.
Do not fall behind.
Content is cumulative.
And, if you do not work consistently,
it will be difficult to catch up.
Data shows positive correlation between consistent work
and final exam scores.
In other words, if you would like to get a higher grade,
you need to work consistently.
My advice to you is to start each week's work early
and to put effort into learning the material.
You should plan to spend at least 10 hours a week
to succeed in this course.
You will not pass this course if you spend two hours a week
on it.
Because of this time commitment, we
advise you to first realistically determine
if you can afford to spend this much time each week.
If you decide to take this course,
we strongly advise you to plan ahead, to schedule time
each week to study, and to work consistently.
Our teaching team includes PhD students
who will help you learn the content of the course.
To interact with the teaching team and your peers,
use the discussion forum.
The discussion forum is your one-stop shop
designed to address all course-related questions.
If you want to interact with your fellow learners
or if you have a question that you would like
to ask the teaching team, we invite you
to participate in the forum.
The forum has two types of posts, a question
or a discussion.
The difference between the two is as follows.
If you just want to share some insight or make a comment,
post a comment as a discussion.
However, if you would like to receive an answer,
then post it as a question.
Here are some specific tips.
Before asking a question, take time
to think about the material.
Rewatch the video lecture or recitation video.
We have invested considerable resources
in making the content very clear.
So chances are, if you have a question,
the answer is already there.
When asking a question on the forum, be specific.
Provide a descriptive title so it is easy for your peers
to find your question, and it's also easy for us
to understand what a question is about.
We have designated discussion points
at the end of each module.
So make sure to post your questions
in the relevant forum.
Always be polite and respectful.
We have learners from all corners
of the world from different cultures and backgrounds.
Please be polite and respect each other.
We take ethics very seriously.
During the final exam period, we will
close the discussion forum.
The final exam is individual work,
and we do not allow learners to share information
or to collaborate.
We expect you to follow the honor code of edX
and to uphold MIT's standards of academic integrity.
We are glad you're with us.
Welcome to Mathematical Methods for Quantitative Finance
and to our MicroMasters program.