
PROFESSOR: In this class, we're going
to talk about bonds and long term debt.
We're going to start by reviewing some present value
concepts.

So long term debt is one of the firm's key sources
of financing.
You either sell debt.
Or you can maybe finance your firm through selling stock.
What we're going to talk about today
are bonds, which are a major type of long term debt.
They're similar to a loan from a bank.
But they have certain differences
that we'll go through now.
To be able to talk about bonds and to value bonds,
we need to use two present value concepts.
First is the present value of a single future payment.
Second is the present value of an annuity
or a number of future payments.
For some of you, competing present
values already second nature.
But for others of you, it's not.
I'm going to go and review these concepts.
But those of you who know them already,
please go ahead and jump ahead.
So we're going to start with the present value
of a future payment.
So future value, here's the formula,
is related to present value by a function of the interest rate.
Let's do some examples.
If we invested $1 today, how much
would it be worth in a year if interest rates are 8%?
Well, a year from now, if we put that money in a savings bank,
we get our dollar back.
We get 8% interest.
Another way to think about that is we've
got 1 plus 8% interest compounded for one year,
or $1.8.
Now stretching that just a little bit,
what's the future value of a dollar
invested today for three years, again,
if interest rates are 8%?
So in the first year, we'll get 1 plus our 8% interest.
In the second, that will compound.
And in the third year, it'll compound again.
So what we'll end up getting is 1.08, plus the interest rate
compounded for three years, which equals 1.26.
So that's a couple of examples of the formula in red above.
Now we're just going to invert that formula
and talk about the present value.
For the present value formula, the present value
is the future payment divided by 1
plus the interest rate raised to the number of periods
over which you're computing it.
So again, if we're going to get $1 in a year,
how much is that worth for us today?
So clearly, it's worth less than $1
because we have to wait for a year to get that dollar.
And then formally, that's going to be
worth $1 divided by 1 plus the interest rate
raised to the 1 power.
So that's 0.925 and change.
Similarly, if we receive $1 in three years, that
will be worth $1 divided by 1.08%,
the interest rate raised to the third power or 0.793.
And then to see this in a picture,
suppose now that we were to get $100 three years from now
and interest rates are still 8%.
So we have to wait one year, we have to wait a second year,
and in the third year, we're going to get our $100.
Now again, clearly, this is worth less than $100
because we could put the money in the bank at 8%
and have something more than $100
if we had invested in at 8%.
So using our present value formula from above,
this amount is going to be worth $100 divided
by 1 plus our interest rate cubed or 79.38.
Now you can find this factor by googling present value table.
Obviously, you can stick the formula into your calculator.
And there's also functions on Excel to compute this formula.
So that's a present value of a single future payment.
Now we're going to combine those by doing the present value
of an annuity.
So all a three year annuity is, pictured here,
is in a year from now we got $100, two years from now, we
get to another $100, and then three years from now
we'll get a further $100.
So one way to compute this is just sequentially
compute the present value of $100, which we just did,
which is $93, compute the present value of $100 two years
from now, which is $85, compute the present value of $100 three
years from now, which is $79.
Add all those up.
It's about $258.
Now that requires a little bit of calculation.
It's not that hard to do in an Excel spreadsheet.
And this is an ordinary annuity three payments in a rear at 8%.
They're also annuity tables that you can Google.
So if you Google PVOA, which is present value of an annuity,
you can see this table.
Also if you use the Excel at NPV function,
it will also calculate a present value of an annuity.
So those are two building blocks, a single lump
sum paid in the future.
What's the present value of that?
And then what's the present value of payments in an annuity
form where you get the same amount of money every year
for some number of years?