
So now we're going to do an introduction to bonds.
We're going to start with some bond terminology.
Remember, in accounting there's lots of vocabulary,
and different people use the vocabulary in different ways,
but I'm going to define some terms.
And remember, you can always go and look these terms up.
And once you have a good grasp of what the term is,
you'll be able to understand it when people use it
in slightly different ways.
So we're going to do four pieces of terminology on bonds.
First of all, par value.
Par value is the stated value on the face of the bond.
So most bonds, at least in the US, have a par value of $1,000.
And that means if you buy a bond,
at the maturity of the bond, you will get $1,000 back.
Maturity is the date that the firm that
borrowed the money must pay us, the investors,
back our principal.
So this is the date that the firm
has to give us back our $1,000.
Coupon rate is the interest rate that's
stated on the face of the bond.
The coupon rate, as we'll see in some examples now,
is the rate that's used to determine periodic cash
interest payments, if there are any.
An example of when there are not any periodic cash interest
payments is a zero coupon bond.
So a zero coupon bond doesn't pay interest over time.
Instead, it just pays you one lump sum
at the maturity of the bond.
There are three interest rates-- a little bit more terminology
here-- the three interest rates that we're
going to track with our bond accounting.
The first we've already talked about,
which is the coupon rate.
That's the interest rate that's stated on the bond
or in the bond, and that coupon rate
determines how much cash investors get.
An investor is going to get cash equal to the coupon
rate times the par value of the bond.
Coupon payments are typically semiannual.
So that means that if you buy a bond now, six months from now,
you'll get a coupon payment a, cash payment.
12 months from now, you'll get a coupon payment
or a cash payment, et cetera.
In this course, just for simplicity,
we're generally going to have coupon payments made annually,
just to make things a little bit simpler.
And then we're going to use two market interest rates,
and we'll talk where the market interest rate comes
from in just a second.
But there's the market interest rate
at issuance, which is the market rate
at the time we sold the bond.
So this rate determines the interest expense,
and it determines how much bond payable,
or how much of a liability we put on our balance sheet
at issuance.
This is also known as the effective interest rate.
This rate is going to be fixed or set at the time of issuance.
Now, as we'll see in a second, the market interest rate
bounces up and down over time.
And this is the rate that determines the current market
value of the bond.
So if investors want a lot, a high yield right now,
the bond is going to be worth less.
If investors want a low yield right now,
then the bond is going to be worth more.
So this is going to be based on market conditions.
And again, it's going to fluctuate over time.
So here are some examples of these fluctuations
here's the 10-year US Treasury, that
means a US government bond that has a maturity
date 10 years from now.
And here's about 50 years worth of data.
You can see that long ago, the market interest rate on the US
Treasury was about 5%.
It got up as high as about 15% during the oil crisis
and the inflation boom of the early 1980s,
and then it's dropped down over time.
And then if you can see more finely
in this picture, the rate going from January 2018 to present,
so again, it started off at about 2 and 1/2%.
It got up to about 3%.
And it's gone down to less than 2% right now.
So the whole idea is that interest rates will vary over
time because of conditions in the economy,
and that's what you're seeing in these example pictures
of the 10-year US Treasury.