
PROFESSOR: So now we're going to talk about bond accounting,
which is our focus today.
And we're going to work through some examples.
So this is a summary of the accounting.
Turns out the accounting is fairly simple,
and we need to know three things, basically.
We need to, in red, how do we compute interest expense.
And that's going to be the market
rate when the bond was issued times the net bond payable.
And we'll define in just a second
what net bond payable means.
And then interest payable, we've already talked about.
That's the coupon rate, which is again
stated on the face of the bond times the power
amount of the bond.
So if it's a $10,000 bond and the coupon rate is 6%,
interest payable will be $600.
And then the final piece of accounting
is that the difference between interest expense
in the red of the first thing and interest payable in the red
in the second thing is going to be
an amortization of either a discount or a premium.
And we'll work through that in just a second.
So in this class, we're going to do two examples.
We're going to do a bond issue at par value
a par, bond, which again means that at the time
the bond was issued, the coupon rate
was equal to the market rate.
And then we're going to do the accounting for a zero coupon
bond, which again means that the coupon rate is 0%
or it pays no interest until maturity.

So here's our example.
We've got a bond.
We sell it on the 1st of January in 2015.
When we sell the bond, we get $10,000.
At that time, the market interest rate is 6%.
And the bond has a maturity date three years
from the time of issuance.
So in this case, it'll mature on December 31, 2017.
And we're going to look at two alternatives, again,
a par bond and a zero bond.
So first of all, the par bond raises $10,000
at the time we issue it.
The coupon rate is 6%.
Yearly payments of interest are at the end of each year.
And the repayment of the principal
is at the end of the third year.
And then we're going to look at a zero coupon
bond, where we don't get any interest
payments until maturity.
And then at maturity, at the end of year three,
we'll get all of our interest plus our principal.
And what we want to do now is just
think about what annual payments are required first,
under the power bond and then second, under the zero coupon
bond.
So here's a table.
The middle column is the coupon bond.
The coupon bond has a 6% interest rate.
The zero coupon bond has a 0% interest rate.
Now remember, the coupon bond pays annual coupons.
So if we get $10,000 for the proceeds on it ,
we multiply that par value of $10,000 times our coupon of 6%.
At the end of the first year, we'll get $600 for this bond.
At the end of the second year, we'll get another $600
for this bond.
At the end of the third year, we'll get another $600
for the bond.
And at that point, the bond will mature,
so we'll get $10,600 in the third year.
So the total payments on this coupon bond
are $11,800 in cash.
Now the zero, how much are we going
to get at the end of the first year?
It's going to be 0 how much are we
going to get at the end of the second year?
Again, zero.
How much are we going to get at the end of the third year?
Well, we have to work that out now.
So if we're getting $10,000 today
and interest rates are 6% a year,
how much do we owe our bond holders
at the end of three years?
So that's an example of a future value calculation, where
we get $10,000 today, we're going
to compound 6% interest over 3 years,
and we'll work that out--
excuse me -- we'll work that amount out to $11,910.
So notice that the zero, the total payments on the zero
are $11,910, which is $110 more than the total payments
on the coupon bond.
That's because there's interest on interest on the zero because
of the fact that we're not paying
our bondholders on an annual basis the way
that we are on the par bond.
So what we want to do now--
we know the answer to this because we
know that this par bond, which pays us out a total of $11,800
has a present value of $10,000.
But we want to just check that.
So remember, the par bond shown there in our table
pays us $600 in the first year, $600
in the second year, $600 in the third year
plus a lump sum payment of $10,000.
So if you think about that-- and this is the key to bond pricing
--that's an annuity of $600 plus that lump sum of $10,000.
So how can we check that equals $10,000?
So our annuity value is a three year annuity that pays us $600.
The discount rate or the interest rate on that annuity
is 6%.
We can come up with that annuity value
from a table, the PWA table on the internet.
Or we can use Excel.
We can use our calculators.
We'll come up with a total annuity value equals $1604.
and then we compute the lump sum value,
which is the present value of a $10,000 payment to us in three
years.
And that present value is $8,396.
And notice that that sums to $10,000.
So our check goes through.
More generally, you can price any bond using this technique
because any bond is going to be an annuity equal to the coupon
payments to you plus a lump sum, which is equal to the maturity
value of the bond.
Then all you have to do is to plug-in your interest rate
and then do these calculations to come up
with the value of the bond.