
PROFESSOR: Now we're going to do the accounting,
having sort of set things up.
First of all, we're going to look at our par bond.
So the par bond has a 6% coupon rate.
At issuance, remember we get $10,000 in cash.
And then to balance the balance sheet equation,
we're going to set up a liability for bond
payable equal to $10,000.
Now let's think about the periodic accounting,
which has to do with our interest payments over time.
So how much cash interest is this bond
going to pay in the first year?
Well, it's going to be 6% times the par value of the bond.
So 6% times $10,000 is a $600 interest payment.
And then we're going to balance the balance sheet
equation with a interest expense of $600.
Same thing will happen in the second year.
Same thing will happen in the third year.
And then something else will happen in the third year,
which is the bond matures.
So we'll pay $10,000 worth of cash to our bondholders.
And the liability for the bond will have been discharged.
So we remove it from our balance sheet.
So now we're going to do the accounting
for a zero-coupon bond, which will
be a little bit more complicated than the accounting
for the par bond that we just did.
Remember our zero raises $10,000.
So when we sell the bond, we get $10,000 worth of cash.
Now, how much of a liability do we have?
You don't have $10,000 of liability.
But at some point, our bond payable is going to be $11,910.
That point isn't right now, though.
So we got cash in at $10,000.
What are we going to do here to balance the balance sheet
equation?
What we're going to do is to create this discount account,
where the discount says in accounting speak,
right now, I owe you bondholders $10,000.
But over time, as the discount gets amortized away,
I'm going to owe you bondholders $11,910.
So let's see how this works now over time.
So the net bond payable here is the bond
payable of $11,910 minus the discount amount.
So right now, we owe our bond holders $10,000.
Now, this is a slide that we talked about just a couple
of minutes ago.
But I want to remind you of what we're going to do here.
So interest expense, remember, is the market rate
at the time the bond is issued times the net bond payable.
So at the start for the zero, our net bond payable
is $10,000.
Interest payable is the coupon rate times the par amount.
This is a zero-coupon bond.
So the coupon rate is 0%.
Our interest payable will be zero.
And then the difference between interest expense and interest
payable--
we're going to amortize against the bond discount account.
And we'll see that the discount account will go away over time.
So here's the accounting we just did a second ago.
When we sell the bond, we get $10,000 worth of cash.
We have a bond payable of $11,910.
And then we've got a discount of $1,910.
Notice the "XL" by that discount.
That means this is a contra liability account.
Remember, this is like depreciation in some ways.
Depreciation is a contra asset account.
This discount is a contra liability account,
which means that it reduces the bond payable to a net bond
payable of $10,000.
So now let's do the periodic accounting for this bond.
So in year 1, remember our cash interest payment is 0
because our coupon rate is 0.
On the far right-hand column in retained earnings,
our interest expense is $600.
And that's because our net bond payable
is $10,000 times our 6% market interest rate at the time
we issued it.
And then in the middle, to make the balance sheet equation
balance, we're going to amortize the difference
between the interest expense of $600
and the interest payment of 0.
So we're going to amortize $600 worth the discount
in the first year.
So what will be the net bond payable then
at the end of the first year?
So it will be our discount amount now will be $1,310.
So our net bond payable will be $10,600,
which means that we owe our bondholders what we originally
owed them plus an additional $600 worth of interest.
Now let's see what happens in the second year.
Again, our cash coupon payment is 0.
Our interest expense now has gone up because now we're
paying interest on interest.
So we've got interest expense on our net bond payable of $10,600
times 6% equals $636.
And then again, to make sure the balance sheet
equation balances, we're going to set the discount amount
to be amortized equal to the difference between interest
expense and interest payable.
Now, notice now that the net bond payable
has gotten bigger by $636.
So in our final year, again, we got zero cash interest.
We've got interest expense on our net bond
payable of $11,236 times 6%, which is $674.
And the difference is going to be a reduction
of the amortized discount.
We're amortizing the difference as a reduction to the discount.
And then the final thing that's going to happen
is going to pay off the bonds.
We now owe the bondholders $11,910.
And we're going to-- because we no longer owe the bondholders
that money, the bonds payable will go away at that point.
So you can see what the discount again--
each year, as we amortize the discount,
net bonds payable is going to increase.
And that's going to increase interest expense.
And over time, net bonds payable will equal to the amount
that we owe our bondholders.
This is an Excel example that's on our website.
And I encourage you to look over this just
to see how you can do these calculations in Excel.
So here's our three years on the left-hand column, our beginning
bond payable on column A, cash interest paid, which
is 0 for this zero-coupon bond, interest expense as we
calculated it just a minute ago, discount amortization,
which is the difference between interest expense and cash
interest paid, our discount amount in column E
that amortizes off over time, giving us our net bond payable.
So play with us a little bit.
I encourage you.
And you can see how the accounting for these discount
bonds work.