
Now again, sometimes companies repurchase their bonds
in the open market.
And as we've seen before and as we just
saw in the Tesla example, when things are going badly
for a company, their bond prices go down.
So that's credit quality issues.
And then sometimes interest rates go up and down,
and we're also going to affect the market value of the bonds.
So if I decide to buy back my bonds right now,
it's unlikely to be the case that I'm
going to pay exactly par value or book value for that,
because of the fact that interest rates have
been moving around over time since I issued that bond.
So if we pay more than book value
or more than the liability on our balance sheet,
then we'll have a loss.
If we pay less than book value or less
than the liability on the balance sheet,
then we'll have a gain.
So let's do some examples.
Now, going back to the zero coupon bonds
that we were talking about earlier, at the end of 2015,
we had a bond payable of $11,910 and accrued discount of $1,310,
so that net bond payable was $10,600.
Now, let's suppose that in the open market
our interest rate has gone up from 7%--
gone up to 7% from 6%, and now we repurchase those bonds.
How much do we have to pay to repurchase those bonds?

Well, qualitatively, two years from now, our bond holders
are going to get from us $11,910.
So they want right now the present value of that.
Quantitatively, or mathematically,
that present value is $11,910, discounted
over two years at 7%, So that mathematical present value is
$10,403, which is less than our book value of $10,600.
So the market value went down because interest rates went up,
and so we can pay off these bonds less than the amount
that we recorded on our books.

And our balance sheet equation for that transaction,
if we bought back all the debt for $10,403,
well, first, let's keep track of cash.
We know that cash is going to go down by $10,403.
The bonds will no longer be outstanding,
so bonds payable is going to go away.
Again, the bonds will no longer be outstanding,
so the discount's going to go away.
And then we'll just plug or solve
for the gain or loss of retained earnings.
So that's the number that balances the balance sheet
equation.
And in this case, we're going to make a gain of $197
if we buy this debt back and retire it.
Now let's do the flip side of this example.
But before we do that, let's note
that this gain or loss is going to be on our income statement.
Let's also note this is very similar to the accounting
that we talked about earlier when we sell PP&E.
So if we sell PP&E, the first thing we want to do
is record cash.
We no longer own the property, plant, and equipment,
so that's going to leave our balance sheet.
We no longer own the property, plant, and equipment,
so we're going to have no longer any accumulated depreciation.
And then as we saw then, we're going
to solve for the gain or loss.
So the accounting here, although it's a liability
and PP&E is an asset, is very, very similar.
Now let's do the flip side of the example,
when we pay more than book value for our bonds.
So let's imagine that we repurchase the bonds,
discount rates have gone down to 5%,
so we know that that means the value of the bonds
have gone up.
And in particular, they've gone up
to $10,803, which is the present value of $11,910
that we'll have to pay our bond holders two years from now,
discounted at a 5% rate.
So again, the transaction that we're going to record, first,
keep track of cash.
Cash is going to go down by $10,803.
We're going to then remove the bond payable.
We're going to then remove the discount.
And then we're going to solve for the loss, in this case,
of $203 on debt retirement.