
PROFESSOR: All right, so now we know the accounting for bonds.
We know what happens if we repurchase the bonds.
Now let's see how bonds appear on our financial statement
or their financial statement presentation.
Our balance sheet is going to have
long-term debt due in the next 12 months
as a current liability.
The remainder of long-term debt and non-current liabilities.
We're going to have interest expense.
That's going to appear on our income statement.
On our cash flow statement, if we have a zero coupon bond,
we have interest expense, but we're not
paying any cash out for that.
So remember from our discussions of cash flows,
we're going to add these interest
accruals back to net income to get cash flows.
We're going to have financing cash flows.
So when we issue the debt, that's a financing inflow.
When we repay the debt, that's going
to be a financing outflow on our cash flow statement.
And then in the US at least, at the bottom of a cash flow
statement, there will be a statement on how much
cash is paid for interest.
And of course, there's going to be
details on all these things in the notes
to the financial statements.
So let's look at an example, which
is Advanced Micro Devices.
So right now, Advanced Micro Devices
is just knocking it out of the park.
They've sort of passed Intel as the best semiconductor company.
But that was not true about 10 years ago.
We are looking at AMD's financial statements
for 2011 and 2010.
So in red, notice that the current portion
of their long-term debt as of 2011 was close to $500 million,
which means that in the next year,
AMD had to pay down debt of $500 million.
The long-term portion of their debt was a $1.5 billion
at that time.
Companies also are required to provide
a table called the Contractual Obligations Table.
And from this table, this is an incredibly useful table,
especially for companies like AMD.
If you're an investor in a company
like AMD, where there's a danger of bankruptcy.
So this shows you by year in the future, 2012,
2013, et cetera, how much debt is going to come to,
how much interest is going to become payable,
how much operating lease payments we have to make,
how much capital lease payments we have to make,
and how much purchase obligations we've committed to.
So AMD, as a manufacturer, it's made commitments
to buy raw materials for its chips
from certain of its suppliers.
And it has to pay those suppliers $302 million
in cash in the year 2012.
And so the sum here in 2012 is that AMD has cash commitments
of nearly a billion dollars.
If you're an investor in AMD back at that time,
you would be wondering to yourself,
can AMD find a billion dollars in cash
to pay off these obligations?