
INSTRUCTOR: So now we're going to talk about fair value
of bonds and other liabilities.
So the FASB, which is again the American Accounting Standards
Center, has offered firms the option
to value all their financial liabilities and assets
at fair values.
Let's just talk briefly, does this make sense?
So as we saw with Tesla just a minute ago,
Tesla was performing badly.
There were concerns about its bankruptcy.
Its debt became riskier.
And its debt went from 100 cents on the dollar to about $0.82
on the dollar.
Now, what does this do to its market interest rate?
So Tesla is riskier.
Its market interest rate went up.
What it did to do to the market value of that bond
while the bond values we saw in the picture went down?
What did that do to the coupon rate?
It does nothing.
The coupon rate, remember, is fixed at the time of the bond
issuance.
So if Tesla were to mark its debt to market value,
it had this deterioration in credit quality,
what would happen to its assets and liability?
So you would mark the liability down.
And then the balance sheet, you would have
a gain in shareholders' equity.
So as an example, here's our zero coupon bond again.
We have net bonds payable of 10,600.
And we're going to mark our liabilities to market value.
Interest rates have gone up.
The book value of the bond has gone down.
So the accounting entry we would make
is to increase the discount.
That would reduce the net bond payable.
And then we'd have a fair market value adjustment
in stockholder's equity, which would
have the effect of increasing other comprehensive income.

So bonds payable after we made this entry would be 10,403.
And then stockholders' equity would have gone up by 197.
So all firms, regardless of whether they execute
this fair value option, are required by the FASB
to include a footnote in their financial statements
that tells investors what the fair value or the market
value of their debt is.
And so here's AMD's footnote back from 2011.
Notice that the fair value in 2011
was slightly above the carrying amount as it was also in 2010.
If we look at this over time, all I've done here
is made a little table that shows AMD's fair value of debt
over time that I've gathered from their financial
statements.
So the book value of the debt in 2008 was $4.6 billion.
The market value of that debt was 46%.
And as you can see, that during the crisis period in 2008,
the market expected AMD to go bankrupt.
They didn't think that AMD was going to make their payments.
Therefore, AMD's debt was selling at $0.46 on the dollar.
Over time as the crisis passed, AMD continues to do better.
And the fair value of their debt increases
outside the crisis period.
So I just want to share this little story with you.
So we've been focusing now on debt from the perspective
of the firm that issues that.
Now, clearly as we've talked about before
and we'll talk about more in the future,
there's a group of companies that own the debt.
So firms might issue debt.
Governments might issue debt.
And then somebody else like a bank buys that debt.
So in Italy, again, because the Italian government
has problems with its financing, the yields on its bonds
have gone up.
And that means the value of those bonds have gone down,
so that any Italian bank that holds us bonds
and classifies them as either trading securities
or available for sale securities loses lots of money.
And that puts pressure on the banks.
But the banks have come up with an accounting solution here.
And the accounting solution is, going forward, instead of
classifying those bonds as available for sale or trading
securities, they're going to call them held to maturity.
And as you recall, held to maturity debt
you never do any accounting for until the bonds mature.
So this is going to be an accounting
solution to investing in volatile government debt.

So in terms of takeaways from today,
we talked about bond accounting.
We talked about what happens at interest at issuance.
We talked about what happens when
we pay interest, what happens when interest is accrued,
and how we amortize discounts and premiums.
We talked about what happens if we repurchase the debt
and retire it.
And we talked about how to account
for the fair value of the bond.
And I know that this is a lot of material all at once.
What I encourage you to do is practice some examples,
get comfortable with this.
It looks difficult. But once you work
through a couple of examples, for example,
the spreadsheet that I mentioned earlier,
you'll become more and more comfortable with this
and it will not be so difficult.