
PROFESSOR: Just a brief review from earlier in the class,
remember we talked about the present value of an annuity.
So here's a picture of a three-year annuity that
pays out $100 at the end of the first year,
$100 at the end of the second year,
and $100 at the end of the third year.
And we can just repeatedly present value that.
So the present value of the first $100 is $92.
The second $100 has a present value of $85.
And the third $100 off in the future
has a present value at 8% discount rate of $79.
And then we can add those all up and get the value
of this annuity as 257.71.
Or we can use an annuity formula.
And the annuity formula is, if we multiply the $100 annuity
payment times the present value of a three-year annuity at 8%,
the present value of a three-year annuity at 8%
is 2.57.
And we'll come up with that value.
And again, as we talked about earlier,
there are lots of tables out there you can look at.
So if you Google PVOA table, you can get this number.
And if you're using Excel, the @NPV function
will also give you annuity values.
So we're just reviewing this very briefly
because, as you'll see, a lot of leases look like annuities.
Now, before we do that, let's just talk briefly
about the old leasing standard versus the new leasing
standard.
So again, as I said before, the old standard basically
applies 2018 and before--
the new standard, after 2019 and after.
We have two types of leases--
rental leases and ownership leases.
The terminology under the old standard and the new standard
is very confusing, because they call
them both operating leases.
But under the old standard, the accounting
was the operating leases were off the balance sheet,
whereas under the new standard, the big difference
is, operating leases are on balance sheet.
As far as ownership leases go, the only thing that changed
was terminology.
So under the old standard, ownership leases
were called capital leases.
Now, under the new standard, they're called finance leases.
But the accounting form was exactly the same old standard
and new standard.
Here's an article about WeWork, which is the office space
rental company.
So what WeWork would do is rent a building for the long term.
So we take a five-year lease out on a building
and then sublet that space to tenants
under short-term deals that might be like a month or six
months or something like that.
And as you can imagine, this is risky
because you have a five-year liability
and you have a series of one-month assets.
So you've got an asset liability mismatch.

And the other thing is that prior
to the change in the accounting rules,
all these leases were off-balance sheet.
But during the time of WeWork's IPO, which ended up
being pulled, the accounting rules
changed so that WeWork had a total of about $35 billion
of future lease payments at the end of 2018.
All of these things were off balance sheet.
And only on-balance sheet--
the only on-balance sheet liabilities that it had
were about $3.1 billion.
So let's work through how big WeWork's off-balance sheet
debt was before the standard changed.
So WeWork has a total of about $35 billion
in future lease payments.

And what we want to do is figure out,
under the new standard, how much will
WeWork's liabilities increase.
And we need to compute the present value of these lease
payments.
And in order to do this, we have to figure out,
in our mind, how long will this $35 billion last.
So let's just make an assumption that these
are five-year leases.
So the leases are 5 payments of $7 billion a year.
So this is not necessarily realistic,
but it's just an operating assumption.
And then if you're curious, you can go back and change
this assumption in other ways.
And we're going to assume that the discount
rate on these leases is at 8%.
So WeWork at this time had a public bond
that traded at a rate of 8%.
So the discount rate at 8% seems reasonable.
So now, if we assume that we've got annuity
of 5 payments of $7 billion a year,
we're going to present value that annuity of 5 payments
at a discount rate of 8%.
You can look up the annuity factor.
It's 3.9927.
And if we multiply that by $7 billion,
the amount of liabilities that will be coming on-balance sheet
for WeWork is $27.9 billion.
So the off-balance sheet liabilities,
the OBS liabilities are about 9 times greater
than their on-balance sheet liabilities.
So this is one of the issues that WeWorks had,
is that you sort of had all these hidden liabilities.
And the standard change was going
to make these hidden liabilities go on balance sheet.