
Now let's just think about why a company would lease.
And you can sort think, also, why would you--
so why would a company that's buying a building
or buying a piece of equipment, the company can take out a loan
and buy this building or buy this piece of equipment,
or it can lease.
It's also helpful to think about you're
thinking about buying a car.
You can buy the car using a loan,
or you can buy the car using a lease.
So most of these add advantages and disadvantages for a company
are the same as for you as an individual.
So here's a little chart that compares them.
Number 1 is you buy with a loan, number 2 is when you lease.
Now, when you think about if you buy a car, you own that car.
If you lease a car, who owns the car?
So if you lease a car, the dealer
or whoever is leasing the car still owns the car.
So if you don't pay your loan payment
or you don't pay your lease payment,
what is easier to repossess, a loaned car or a leased car?
So a leased car, you don't own it, so it's easier for somebody
to repossess it.
Legally, it's going to be more difficult to repossess
an owned car.
So that intuition tells you that when a company sells
you a car and loans you money, it
takes more risk, because you own the car,
than if you leased the car, because it's easier
to repossess the car.
Since there's more credit risk with a loan,
a bigger down payment is required.
Same thing with corporations.
So higher credit quality is necessary for buying
with a loan.
Lower credit quality is necessary for obtaining
an asset with a lease, again, because it's easier
to repossess.
So you can give an asset to a lower quality credit
if you lease it, because you know that you can repossess
that asset if things go bad.
Ownership, on the other hand, is less flexible.
If you get tired of your car and you own it,
you have to sell it.
But if you get tired of your car,
you can often turn it back into the lessor.
In terms of taxes--
and this applies only to companies--
so if you buy a car, as we talked about with Hertz,
you get a depreciation tax deduction,
but that's only if you have taxable income, whereas if you
lease the car, most of the lessors
are high tax finance companies, so they always
get the depreciation tax deduction
and they sometimes share that back with the lessee.
The accounting treatment, in terms of buying with debt,
we talked about earlier.
And in terms of buying with lease,
that's what we're going to do in the rest of the class now.