
PROFESSOR: So leases, a lease is an agreement
that you have the right to use property, plant,
and equipment for some period of time,
usually a year or more, OK?
So the owner is the lessor.
The renter is the lessee.

And there's two questions.
One is, is there an economic difference
between leasing equipment versus buying equipment?
And the second is what we were more concerned
about, is what should be the accounting for leases?
So let's think about the economics.
Imagine that you rent a Zipcar for a day.
So clearly, you rent that car.
If you rent a Zipcar for a month, you're still renting,
but you get control over the asset for a month.
If you take a three-year lease, you're still renting,
but you have control over that asset for three years.
If you take a three-year lease with a purchase option,
you have total control of that asset,
because you can buy the asset at the end of the lease.
So it's pushing you closer to ownership.
And then finally, if I give you a five-year lease
with a bargain purchase option, so
at the end of the lease you can buy the car for, say, like $1,
then that lease is effectively the same as ownership.
So the way the accounting works is
for rental leases, where most of the asset
is rented we'll call those operating leases.
And when the lessee essentially owns the asset
or owns the property, we'll call those finance leases.
Now we're going to start working through the accounting
for finance lease.
Now, there's a set of accounting criteria
that you look at to determine whether something's a finance
lease or an operating lease.
And this is not something you need to know,
but it's useful to know the intuition.
So if the lessee gets almost all of the economic value out
of the asset, then it's a finance lease.
On the other hand, if the lessee has to give the asset back
when there's a lot of the useful life of the asset left,
then it's an operating lease.
So the two things are rather the best intuition.
So if the lease term is most of the economic life of the asset,
it's a finance lease.
If the present value of the payments under the lease
equals or exceeds the fair value of the underlying assets,
so if we bought the asset today and it was a car,
we pay $50,000 but the present value of our lease payments
is over $50,000, then that's a finance lease.