
Now let's look at lease disclosures for Delta,
which is the big airline.
And Delta owns some of its airplanes.
Again, though, because of tax reasons,
it leases a lot of its airplanes, because the lessor--
which is a financial institution--
can sort of get those tax benefits
and share them with Delta.
So this is Delta's 2018 annual report
showing their 2018 and 2017 liabilities
and stockholders' equity.
Notice that on our balance sheets,
we've always had long term debt, and we've always
had capital leases or finance leases.
Starting in 2018, Delta puts operating leases
on its balance sheet.
So, as you can see, there's nine current operating leases
of $5.8 billion there, but the year before, there
was nothing on their balance sheet.
And then we can see, also, that they've
got current maturities of debt and leases
on our balance sheet.
And we only see the current maturities or operating leases
after they chose to capitalize these operating leases.
Let's look briefly at the asset side of their balance sheet.
Notice that in property, plant, and equipment,
they've always had lots of property, plant, and equipment
under finance leases.
Now that they started capitalizing the operating
leases, we see operating lease assets
going on their balance sheet.

So now we're going to do an example of a finance lease
to sort of understand what's going on with the accounting.
So Delta is going to lease an airplane.
The airplane has a current cost of $300 million.
Let's suppose the expected life of the asset is 30 years,
the lease term is 30 years, Delta's borrowing rate is 6%,
and the annual lease payment is $21,975 per year.
So this is a finance lease.
The reasons include the criteria for lease is not on the exam,
but you can see that the lease term is
the same as the useful life of the asset,
and you can see that the present value of the lease payments
is equal to the value of the asset.
So we'll just compute that on this slide.
So the finance lease obligation--
we're going to make 30 lease payments of $22 million.
If we look at the present value of a $1 annuity
for 30 years at a 6% discount rate, that's about 14.
And then if we multiply the $22 million
times the annuity factor, except for a little bit of rounding,
that comes out to be $300 million.
So that's how much we're going to put on our balance sheet
at the time we initiate the lease.
So the time we initiate the lease,
it's like 100% debt financing.
We're going to put on a $300 million lease obligation,
and then we're going to offset that,
make the balance sheet equation balance,
by putting on a $300 million lease asset.
So the present value of the lease
is equal to the present value of the periodic lease payments.
Now the accounting for the leases during the terms
of the lease--
remember how much is a lease payment.
It's about $22 million.
So cash is going to go down.
We're going to have interest expense on the lease, which
is the $300 million times our 6% interest rate.
And then the difference here is going to reduce the principal
like an installment loan.
So these lease loans are like your car loan,
or like your house loan, where you're continually
making the same payment.
In the early years most of that payment
goes to interest, as we show here, and little of it
goes to principal.
So that's how interest expense, the reduction
in the lease obligation--
remember, we've got an asset also--
so we're going to amortize that asset.
So we have amortization expense, a $300 million asset amortized,
or depreciated-- amortization and depreciation mean the same
thing--
amortized over 30 years.
So that's year one.
Let's just take a peek at year two.

So we've got year one still showing there.

We're going to have cash of the lease payment.
Now is interest expense is going to be
more or less in the second year than in the first year.
Remember, we've gotten rid of some of the lease obligations,
so we repaid it.
So our principal amount is less, so our interest expense
is going to be less in the second year,
and then that means that we're going
to get rid of more of the lease obligation in the second year,
and then amortization expense will be the same.
And here's what it looks like.
There's a spreadsheet on the web that shows this,
but this just shows over the course of the 30 years,
column B is beginning lease liability.
Here how much interest expense we pay on it.
Here's the lease payment.
Principal reduction is the difference
between the lease payment and the interest expense.
That gives us an ending lease liability.
And then we amortize the asset, and then that
gives us an ending lease asset.
So all of this is just an application of present value
concepts, and the spreadsheet again is on the web.

And in terms of pictures, remember we're straight-line
amortizing the asset.
So the purple line there shows that the asset
is being amortized away in a straight-line fashion.
The liability, because of the fact
that we're paying mostly interest early on and not
that much principal, the liability has a concave shape.
And it tends to amortize off slower than the asset does.

And then we look at the cash flow effects.
The cash flow is going to be constant.
So we're going to be paying the $22 million a year
for 30 years.
But the expense goes down over time
because interest expense goes down,
whereas amortization expense is constant.
