
PROFESSOR: So we've just looked at finance leases.
Now we're going to look at the accounting for operating
leases.
We're going to continue on with our same example of Delta
leasing an airplane for 30 years.
But now, we're going to change the assumptions just
a little bit and assume that the accounting for the lease
is an operating lease accounting.
And this is not on our exam, but maybe the life of the plane
is much greater than 30 years.
So that would give us operating lease accounting.
And at the start of the lease, start of the operating lease,
the accounting is exactly the same as for a finance lease.
Both the asset and the liability are
valued at the present value of the lease payments.
So as we saw with the finance lease,
present value of the lease payments is $300 million.
That's going to come on our balance sheet
as an asset, the lease asset.
And it's going to come on our balance sheet
as a liability, the lease obligation.
So the initial present value of the lease,
again, is just the present value of those 30
payments of $22 million a year.
Now, ongoing accounting for operating
leases under IFRS, International Financial Reporting Standards,
this is sensible.
Operating lease accounting is pretty much the same
as finance lease accounting under IFRS.
In the US under US GAAP, which is run, again,
by FASB, the Financial Accounting Standards
Board, which is somewhat of a political operation--
so US firms lobbied the FASB so that operating leases
would have the same expense each period.
And you would wonder why did they do this?
Remember from our earlier discussion of finance leases,
the finance lease starts with high expense,
and the expense gets lower as you go through the lease term.
And this higher expense is undesirable for companies.
So they'd rather have a lower expense to start.
So they lobbied the FASB which contrived
to have the same expense.
And in order to do that, we have to back into, solve for,
or plug for, what's called amortization expense.
So let's see how this works in an example.
But before this, I want to emphasize that we are
focusing here on simple leases.
And what a simple is, it's the same period payment each year.
So if it's a 10 year lease, say like it's $1,000 a year
each year, and the first payment is
at the end of the first year, not
at the start of the first year.
And more complicated leases, which
are not going to be on our exam, the accounting
is basically the same, but it's much more complicated.
So for that reason, we're just going
to focus on simple leases.
And the way the accounting for operating leases
works in the US, is first we compute straight line expense.
So if we had a lease that had 10 payments of $1,000 each,
the total cost of the lease would be $10,000.
We divide that by the number of payments, which would be 10.
So the straight line expense of $1,000
would be the same as the annual lease payment.
And then second, we would calculate
what's considered the interest expense on the liability.
And then we would solve for the, quotation marks, amortization
expense, by subtracting the so-called interest
expense, in quotation marks, from the straight-line expense.
And I'm using quotation marks here,
and textbooks do the same thing, because there's really
no separate amortization expense.
There's no separate interest expense for an operating lease.
We're just calculating those as intermediate steps,
as we'll see on the next slide.

So here's our ongoing accounting for operating leases.
We're going to just look at year one.
But with the operating lease, every year
is going to be the same, as we'll see in a minute.
So first thing we want to do, keep track of cash.
So the lease payment is about $22 million, $21,795.
So cash goes out.
We pay $22 million at the end of the first year.
That reduces our debt, or obligation, to the lessor.
Then lease expense is going to be $21,795 as well.
And that's our straight-line expense again.
Then we're going to compute the, in quotation marks,
interest expense.
Remember our beginning liability was $300 million.
The interest rate on the lease is 6%.
So we're going to compute the, in quotation marks,
interest expense as $300 million times 6%, which is $18 million.
And then we're going to compute the, in quotation
marks, amortization, or reduction in the lease asset,
as a straight-line expense of $22 million,
minus the interest expense of $18 million.
So the reduction in the lease asset is about $3.8 million.
Now once you see this, another way to do this--
and remember, before I say that, there's no amortization
expense here.
So the lease asset, unlike a finance lease asset,
we're not going to accumulate amortization.
We're just going to reduce the lease asset, the operating
lease asset, a little bit each year.
But we're not going to do it through an accumulated
amortization contra asset.

Now once we see that, an alternative
is to do just a single line balance sheet equation entry.
So again, the first thing we want to do, keep track of cash.
Cash goes down by about $22 million.
The lease expense is about $22 million.
The reduction in the lease obligation
is the lease payment of $22 million minus the $18 million
and in quotation, interest expense.
And then the reduction of the lease asset
is going to be the same as the reduction in the lease
obligation.
So our amortization expense, in quotation marks,
is going to be the straight-line expense of about $22 million
minus the interest expense of $18 million.
So again, that's two equivalent ways to do it.
Now let's look at this.
And again, there's no amortization expense.
Notice that there's no accumulated amortization contra
asset here.