SPEAKER: And then we can look at a spreadsheet similar to what
we looked at for finance lease.
So we're doing this over 30 years.
So column A is the year.
Column B is the starting lease liability, the beginning
of this liability.
We begin with a liability of $300 million.
Then we add interest expense to that.
That's column C. Then we subtract the payment from that.
And that's how much principal reduction we have.
And then that gives us column F, which
is the ending lease liability.
And then column G is essentially the same
as column E, which is the amortization or the reduction
in the lease asset.
And then that gives us column H in red, which
is the ending lease asset.
So again, the two differences from the finance lease
are we're straight lining the lease expense.
So the lease expense is the same every year,
as shown in column D, and that we're amortizing the lease
asset more slowly.
And that becomes clearest on this next picture here.
Whereas we saw with the finance lease obligation,
the lease obligation declines over time in a concave fashion.
So it declines more slowly at the beginning
and then declines more rapidly at the end.
But because the lease payment and the lease expense
are the same, because we force those things to be true,
the lease asset is also going to decline--
as shown in the green line there--
in that concave fashion.
So all the picture says, then, is
that the asset, the lease asset, amortizes at the same rate
as the lease liability.
And a question for you to think about is, does this make sense?
And another way to observe this is, what kind of depreciation
do we now have on the lease asset?
OK, notice the depreciation rate is slow at the beginning
and then faster toward the end.
So this is called decelerated depreciation.
And you remember from our earlier discussions
on depreciation, you would think that economic depreciation is
actually accelerated, so the asset
depreciates faster in its early years
than it does in its later years.
And again, we used the example of when you buy a car.
If you buy a car and then you drive that car home,
that car is worth only about 75% of what
you paid for it by the time you get home.
So there's very rapid accelerated depreciation
at the start of the asset's life.
So in order to get this straight line expense,
we're making an assumption that's
kind of silly about the depreciation of the leased
asset or the amortization of these assets.
But that's what you get in some sense
when you get politicians involved in economics,
or standard setting in this case.

So the difference, again, is with the finance lease,
the expense is in the red line.
So the expense starts high and then gets smaller over time.
Because interest expense is high at the beginning.
And as you pay off the debt, the interest expense gets lower.
In the US, we have this contrived thing
where the operating lease is shown in the blue line.
The expanse is constant over time.
And as we said, that doesn't make a lot of sense.
But it's important to understand that to be
able to interpret what's going on in the financial statements.