
INSTRUCTOR: So recall when we were talking
about long-term debt, we saw a required disclosure
by Advanced Micro Devices, or AMD,
about their contractual obligations.
So every company has to disclose this.
Here's Delta Airlines' disclosure
of contractual obligations in their 2018 10K.
So at the top you can see there's long-term debt,
there's principal, there's interest.
The next line is the finance lease obligations.
There's principal, there's interest.
And the amounts are shown for the next five years.
So 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023.
And then there's this big sum which
is thereafter, which is just 2024
and all the years after 2024.
So debt and finance leases have always been on balance sheet.
Recently, as we saw earlier, Delta
has put their operating leases on balance sheet.
So this is disclosure of cash flow amounts.
But these amounts also show up on the balance sheet.
But the remaining amounts in this table--
and they're going to differ depending
on whether you're looking at an airline
or whether you're looking at AMD--
so for Delta, Delta's make commitments to buy aircraft,
so they're going to buy them from Airbus
or they're going to buy buy them from Boeing.
So you can see there's a lot of big cash
flows in the future associated with Delta's commitments
to buy airplanes.
There's also commitments to their contract carriers, which
are the carriers that sort of are subsidiaries of Delta that
help Delta serve customers.
They've got obligations to their employees, their employee
benefit obligations, and they've got other obligations as well.
So all these cash flows that are disclosed here
are not on Delta's balance sheet.
So there's no liability for them on Delta's balance sheet.
So as we see, there's off balance sheet items.
So pre-2019, operating leases, purchase commitments
like these, aircraft, investment commitments.
And the common link here is these
are kind of like liabilities.
Remember for liabilities, we got three tests,
they require future economic sacrifice.
There's some kind of transactions
that occur that's given rise to the liability.
And the final thing is remember, they
have to be estimable with a reasonable amount of precision.
So companies have somehow kept these off balance sheet items
off balance sheet even though their liabilities, they
require economic sacrifice, but maybe they don't clearly
reflect a past transaction, or maybe they're
not reasonably estimable.
But they're still real cash flows
that we're going to probably have to make in the future.
So who cares about these off balance sheet items, and why?
So as I just suggested, clearly the companies care about them.
Companies want to make it look like they're low risk so
that more obligations or more liabilities you can keep off
of your balance sheet, somebody that's
reading your financial statements not very
carefully or not very thoughtfully
will see you as being lower risk than you truly are.
And that brings up the second point is that people that
lend you money--
so people that are lending Delta money--
really care about these off balance sheet obligations
because these are claims to cash that the firm is
going to probably have to pay in the future.
And those claims to cash compete with the lender's claims
to cash, so the lender wants to understand will Delta
have enough money to both meet their contractual obligations
and also to pay me, as a lender, off.
And then finally, this is the focus
we take in this course is investors.
So Delta may have slightly different off balance sheet
obligations than does, say, United or Southwest
or another big airline.
And we want to make apples to apples comparisons
between Delta and United Airlines
or between Delta and Southwest Airlines.
So one way to do this is to capitalize off balance sheet
items, that is, to value them, and then do a pro forma balance
sheet where we're putting these things back
on the balance sheet.