
So what we're going to do in the remainder of this segment here
is talk about how we would go about capitalizing these
off balance sheet items.

All right.
So we got these cash flows that are off balance sheet.
Moody's, which is a big credit rating agency.
And so there's Moody's and Standard and Poor's.
They rate people's ability to pay.
OK.
So if you got an A-plus rating from Standard & Poor,
that means you have a high ability to pay.
If you've got a C-rating from Standard & Poor's
or Moody's, that means you have a low ability to pay.
So Moody's and Standard and Poor's are major credit rating
agencies.
They're looking at these off balance sheet items,
and at least they claim that they're already
assessing the risk of these OBS, off balance sheet risk,
as part of their credit analysis already.
And it has a big impact on the issuer's credit rating
depending on the size and the nature of the exposure.
And this, as they say, is important
because as we just said a minute ago,
companies attempt to minimize the perception of risk
by trying to put various obligations off balance sheet.
So what we're going to do now is just
sort of talk about computing these off balance sheet amounts
and then putting them on, on balance sheet.
And when you do that--
well, it depends on your objective.
So if you're just trying to take a quick peek
at the financial statements, then you're
clearly not going to do this.
But if you're a financial analyst following the airline
industry, you want to be able to compare, again,
Delta with United Airlines on an apples to apples basis.
And then in case you want to do this yourself,
we're going to now go through some simple techniques
for valuing these off balance sheet items
and putting them on the balance sheet.
So we've got this information about
the contractual obligations, about the
off balance sheet items.
So how would we use that to estimate the liability?
So the liability conceptually is just
the discounted present value of the off balance sheet item.
So we know what the off balance sheet items are.
So what we really need is off balance sheet items after
the fifth year-- remember there's that big thereafter
thing that happens--
and we also need a discount, right?
So when we do this, we're going to tell you
what discount rate to use.
So in this example, we're going to assume
the discount rate is 4%.
If we ask you to capitalize an off balance sheet item,
we'll tell you what the discount rate is.
Now, in the real world how would you estimate the discount rate?
So if you remember from our discussions last time,
Delta probably has publicly traded debt outstanding.
So we could look at the yield or the rates
on that publicly traded debt.
Also, as we saw earlier, Delta sort of shows you
what the cash flows from their leases
are and then comes up with a present value of those leases.
So you could reverse engineer that calculation
and figure out what implied rate Delta or a firm
is using on their leases.
And then in the real world, there
are various rules of thumb.
So always use a 5% discount rate, always multiply the cash
flows by 10.
So there are various rules of thumb
that people that know the industry very well.
Maybe the rule of thumb in the airline industry
is 6 times the next year's cash flow.
All right.
So just in summary.
So I just picked these numbers up from the slide we just
looked at a moment ago.
So these are the ones that are off balance sheet,
and then I put a total in for each year for the next five
years.
And then notice that we have that big thereafter amount
of about $12 billion, and the total is about $35 billion.
Then if we just take the total amounts for each year,
all I'm doing is transposing them
to make it a little bit easier to do the calculation.
So again, we see the next five years,
and we see that thereafter amount.
So one trick in doing this is, we have to think to ourselves,
what years does that thereafter amount correspond to?
So clearly, part of it's 2024, but how
does that tail of cash flows--
how does that manifest itself starting in 2024?
So the rule of thumb we're going to use
is we're just going to look at the thereafter amount,
look at the year before.
So notice the thereafter is 11,594.
We're going to divide by the year before,
and then that gives us 3 and 1/2 years of cash flows
at the same rate as 2023.
We're going to round that down to three years
and then divide the 11,594 divided by 3
to give us annual cash flow starting in 2024 of 3,865.
So I'll just plug those in here.
So all we've just done is assume the thereafter is going
to be 3 equal cash flows 2024, 2025, 2026
and each of those cash flows is equal to 3,865.
So clearly, you can make other assumptions than this,
but this is a reasonable way to sort of say the thereafter
doesn't all happen in 2024.
Some of it happens in 2025 and 2026.
And then once we've got the cash flow as a rate like this,
we just pop these into our Excel spreadsheet,
take the present value-- so if our present value at 4%--
so the 2019 cash flow, we're going
to discount it 4% one time.
2020 is discounted at 4% two times, et cetera, et cetera.
That gives the present value of each of the cash flows,
and then we add all those up.
And then we get the present value, the $35 billion
nominal cash flows has a present value of about $30 billion.
Now, this looks a little intimidating.
So to bring this on our balance sheet,
we're going to add $30 billion to both assets and liabilities
as we did with operating leases earlier.
Now, as I started to say a minute ago,
this looks intimidating, but notice on examinations,
we're going to make it easier for you.
So here's a pretend company we're
asking you to capitalize its operating
lease in years before operating leases were on balance sheet.
And then notice that we tell you,
assume that this company makes equal lease payments
over a nine-year period.
So if you look at 2016, there's $600,000 there.
Thereafter is $2.4 million.
If you divide 600,000 into 2.4 million,
you get four payments of $600,000.
So the whole thing is basically nine payments of $600,000,
and that's easy for us to value using an annuity table.
So this is easier on the exam.
In the real world, you'll have to do
a little bit of calculations like this
and stick it into an Excel spreadsheet.
So having done that, we came up with $30 billion extra.
Does this matter in the case of Delta?
So their assets to equity ratio--
so their leverage ratio--
total assets divided by stockholders' equity--
is 4 and 1/2 with what they've got on balance sheet.
If we add this $30 billion to both assets and liabilities,
their leverage ratio goes to 6 and 1/2.
So their leverage ratio goes up by about 50%,
and that's quite meaningful.
And again, we're going to compare
that to, say, like United Airlines or other carriers
in the same industry to see how that comparison actually
works out.