PROFESSOR: Now one final point I want to make here.
So this is going back.
And we looked at this earlier in the session.
So remember in 2017, Delta had no liability
for operating leases on its balance sheet.
In 2018 it early adopted the new accounting standard
and put about a $6 billion liability on balance sheet
for their operating leases.
So one thing this means intuitively
is that Delta, in 2018, is not really
comparable to Delta in 2017.
Because 2017 doesn't have $6 billion
worth of liabilities on its balance sheet.
Whereas 2018 does.
And as a practical matter for you all as you
become professionals, you're not actually
necessarily going to be looking at financial statements.
You're going to be looking at data feeds.
So this article in The Wall Street Journal from 2019
says these new lease accounting rules
have resulted in potentially misleading data feed.
So the data in 2017 didn't have the operating leases
on balance sheet.
The data in 2018 did.
OK, now if you do a financial ratio, like a leverage ratio,
if you do that naively you'll see that Delta's leverage
ratio jumps in 2018.
But the issue is how the data providers
are including these leases.
So one thing you could do is go back
and adjust the historical data to put
the leases on balance sheet.
The other thing you could do is adjust
the current and future data to remove the operating
leases on balance sheet.
But really probably what people are doing
is they don't really think about it.
And so you see this big jump in leverage,
which is just an accounting mirage so to speak.
It's a cautionary tale on the analytical impact,
the article says.
And this analytical impact is really
big in airlines or transportation,
where you got a lot of leases coming on balance sheet.
So you always have to understand,
if you're getting information from a data
feed, how that data was computed as it went into the data feed.

So in terms of takeaways for leases,
we talked about the rationale for leases,
why companies do leases.
We talked about the difference between operating and finance
leases.
We talked about how, under the old accounting standard,
operating leases were off-balance sheet.
Under the new standard they're on balance sheet.
So again, 2017 and 2018 for Delta,
without any doing any adjustment,
you're not able to compare them apples to apples.
And we talked about how we can use the disclosures related
to contractual obligations to estimate these leases so
that we can compare the off-balance sheet
items on an apples to apples basis,
both for the firm over time and for the firm
as it's compared to its peers.