
PROFESSOR: Without further ado, let's
begin with the first topic--
implied volatility.
In the week 6 lecture, we saw how
the Black-Scholes-Merton model can
be used to infer the volatilities of underlying
stock prices.
These so-called implied volatilities--
that is, volatilities that are reverse engineered
in the Black-Scholes-Merton model using observed options
prices--
are forward looking measures of market uncertainty
about future returns, and are typically
less variable than options prices themselves.
For example, consider a European call option
on a non dividend paying stock with spot price, S,
equal to 21, strike price, K, equal to 20,
risk-free rate, r, equal to 10%, and time
to expiration, T minus t, equal to 0.25.
Recall the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing formula
for a European call option, given in equation 1 below.
The price of the call option on the left hand side
is equal to the spot price, S, times the cumulative density
function of a standard normal random variable evaluated
at d1, minus K, the strike price of the option, times
e to the negative r times T minus t,
times N evaluated at d2.
Now, suppose that the market price of the call option,
which we'll call C, is equal to 1.875.
How can we use equation 1 to find sigma, the volatility
of the underlying stock price?
While it's generally impossible to invert equation 1 in order
to solve for sigma as a function of S, K, r, T, and C,
we can numerically iterate on sigma using the BSM and Black's
Model.xls spreadsheet.
In particular, let's begin by guessing an initial value
for sigma, say 0.3 or 30%.
Plugging these parameters into the BSM tab of the spreadsheet,
we calculate a call price of $2.10.
The inputs and output of the spreadsheet are in the figure
below.
Clearly, the call price of 2.10 is too high,
relative to the market price of 1.875.
So what value of sigma should we try next?
Well, since we know that the price of the European call
option is increasing the volatility of the underlying
stock price, we should try a smaller value of sigma--
say, 0.2.
Doing so yields a call price of 1.76,
which is now too low relative to the market price of 1.875.
We can repeat the above procedure, plugging
in a value of sigma somewhere between 0.2 and 0.3, say 0.25.
Depending on whether the calculated call
price is above or below the market price,
we adjust our input of sigma upward or downward,
iterating until the calculated call price is close
enough to the market price.
The resulting value of sigma will be the implied volatility
of the call option.
This iterative method can be pretty tedious to implement
by hand, though.
Is there a faster way to find the optimal input of sigma?
The answer, unsurprisingly, is yes.
In particular, one way to efficiently calculate
the implied volatility of the call option
is to use Microsoft Excel's solver tool.
In order to retrieve the solver tool,
first load the Solver add-in, and then open Solver
under the Analysis group in the Data tab.
In the pop up menu, define the objective
to be the cell corresponding to the value of the call option--
in this case, cell D16.
We want to change the variable in the cell corresponding
to sigma, such that the call option has
a value equal to its market price of 1.875.
So we want to set the objective to the value of 1.875.
The changing variable cell, D9, is
going to be the sigma, or volatility of the underlying
stock price.
After running the solver, you should
find that an optimal value of sigma equal to 0.235
will yield the value of the call option
that is approximately equal to its market price of 1.875.
In other words, the implied volatility of the call option
is 23.5% per annum.
The output of the solver is displayed in this figure below.
In principle, one could also use a similar procedure
with binomial trees to compute the implied volatilities
of American options.