
PROFESSOR: Well, that wraps up the first topic.
Let's move on to the second topic of this recitation,
Black's model.
Recall from the Week 6 lecture that we
can price European options on futures contracts using
Black's model.
A version of the Black-Scholes-Merton model
that assumes that futures prices are log-normally distributed.
Let's see how we can use Black's model to price a European call
option on a bond.

Let's assume that a European call
option with 10 months to expiration
is written on a bond with 9.75 years to maturity,
a face value of $1,000, and a semi-annual coupon of $50.
Furthermore, assume that the futures price of the bond
is $939.68, the strike price of the European call option
is $1,000, or the face value of the bond,
and the risk-free rate for the next 10 months is 10%.

If the volatility of the futures bond price is 9% annually,
what would be the price of the call option
according to Black's model?
We'll begin by recalling that according
to Black's model, the price of a European call
option on a futures contract with strike price, K, futures
price, F, risk-free rate, r, and volatility of the futures
price, sigma, is equal to c, the price of the call option,
is equal to e to the negative r times T,
times the difference between the futures price F,
times N evaluated at d1, minus the strike price K,
times N evaluated at d2, where d1 and d2 are defined similarly
as in the Black-Scholes-Merton model, only this time instead
of the spot price of the underlying asset,
we have the futures price, F.
As noted in the Week 6 lecture, this pricing formula
for Black's model is identical to that of the European call
option on the stock according to the Black-Scholes-Merton model
except that as noted earlier, we substitute the futures price
F for the stock price and set the dividend yield
equal to the risk-free rate.
From here, solving the problem is pretty mechanical.
All we need to do is plug-in for the strike price K, $1,000,
for the futures price F, $939.68,
for the risk-free rate, r, 0.1 for 10%, for, sigma,
the volatility of the futures price, 0.09 or 9%,
and for T, the time to maturity, 10 divided
by 12 for 10 months, which is equal to 0.8333
into the expressions for d1, d2, and c, that we just derived.
Doing so, we can solve analytically for d1, d2, and c.
However, it's probably easier to just input the parameters
into the corresponding cells in the Black's model
tab of the BSM in Black's Model.xls spreadsheet.
This will allow us to find the price of the European call
option directly.
Doing so will yield a price of $9.49.
