
PROFESSOR: Topic two was brief, so let's finish the recitation
by reviewing currency options.
Currency options are actually conceptually quite
similar to the options on stocks and futures
that we've seen in lectures so far.
A currency option gives the holder of the option
the right, but not the obligation,
to buy or sell a certain currency at a predetermined
exchange rate on or before a specific date, maturity
date of the option.
Are there a Black-Scholes-Merton type formula
analogous to those used to price call and put options
on stocks for European currency options?
We'll begin by recalling from the week five lecture
that the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing
formula for European call and put
options on the stock with a known dividend yield, delta,
are as follows.
On the left hand side, we have the price of a European call
option for a stock with a known dividend yield, delta,
on the right hand side, the price of the put option with d1
and d2 given as the usual formulas,
except we have this adjustment and this term
here for the dividend yield.
The key to pricing currency options
is to realize that foreign currency is
analogous to a stock that pays a known dividend yield.
In particular, the holder of the foreign currency
will receive a dividend yield equal to the risk-free rate,
rf, in the foreign currency.
To keep the notation consistent, let's define
S to be the spot exchange rate.
In particular, S is the value of one unit of a foreign currency
in terms of US dollars.
Then the prices of the European call and put currency options
are the exact same as those for a stock with a known dividend
yield, except now we replace delta, the dividend yield,
with the foreign risk-free rate, rf.
On the left hand side, we have the price of a European call
currency option, where if you notice,
the dividend yield delta has been
replaced with rf and the same thing for the put option.

Both the domestic risk-free rate, r,
and the foreign risk-free rate, rf,
are for maturity, T, of the option here.
As a concrete example, consider a six month European call
option on the British pound.
Suppose that the spot exchange rate, S, is 1.5,
the strike price is also 1.5, the risk-free rate
in the United States is 5% per annum,
the risk-free rate in the United Kingdom is 7% per annum,
and the pound to dollar exchange rate
has a volatility of 12% per annum.
What would be the price of the call option in dollars
according to the equations above?
Using the Black-Scholes-Merton tab of the BSM and Black's
Model xls spreadsheet that we saw in topic one,
we can calculate the price of the European call option
with S, the spot exchange rate, equal to 1.5,
K, the strike price, equal to 1.5,
r, the domestic risk-free rate, equal to 5%,
sigma, the volatility of the exchange rate, equal to 12%,
and delta, which is our dividend yield, in this case,
the foreign risk-free rate equal to 7%,
and finally T, the maturity of the currency option,
equal to 0.5 for six months.
Plugging those input into the Black-Scholes-Merton
calculator, we find a price of the currency call option
to be $0.042.
Finally, let's now assume that the six month forward exchange
rate, F, between pounds and dollars
is the same as the strike price, K, of the European call option.
Armed with this information, what
would be the price of a six month European
put option on the pound?
We actually don't need any other information
in order to solve this problem.
From put-call parity, note that we can relate European call
and put prices on currency options as follows.
On the left hand side, the price of a European call option
plus the strike price of the option times the exponential
of negative r times t, where r is the domestic risk-free rate,
is equal to the put price plus the spot exchange
rate times e to the negative rf T, where rf
is the foreign risk-free rate.
Back in the week one lecture, we learned
the following very important relationship
between the forward exchange rate, F, and the spot exchange
rate, S. In particular, the forward exchange rate
is equal to the spot exchange rate times the exponential
of the difference between the domestic risk-free rate,
r, and the foreign risk-free rate, rf,
times T, the maturity of the option.
Combining these two equations, we
have that the price of the call option plus the strike price
times e to negative rt, the left hand
side of our put-call parity relationship
on the top of the slide, is equal to the put price
plus the forward exchange rate, F, times e to the negative rt.
So we substitute for Se to the negative rfT
using a relationship between the forward exchange rate
and the spot exchange rate.
Clearly from this equation here at the bottom of the slide,
if K is equal to F, so if the strike price is
equal to the forward price, c, the price of the call option,
is equal to p, the price of the put option.
So the price of the European put option
is the same as the price of a European call option.
This result is going to hold generically
for options on any underlying asset, not just exchange rates,
as long as the strike price is equal to the forward price.
That concludes recitation six.
Thank you everyone for coming, and I look forward
to seeing you next week.