
INSTRUCTOR: Alright, now let's begin with the second topic --
pricing an American option.
Assume that the following annual binomial
tree is correct for risk-neutral pricing of bonds and bond
options, where the probability of an up move
is the same as the probability of a down move, which
is equal to 0.5.
In particular, the spot rate at initiation
is 3.5% and either moves up to a higher interest rate state
or down to a lower interest rate state.
In the week 8 lecture, we saw how to price a European call
option on a bond using the same binomial tree,
as on the slide here.
Now, can we use the same tree to price an American call option,
in which case, a three-year 5.25% annual coupon bond is
callable at the end of either one or two years for $99.50?
As in the week 8 lecture, the first step
is to use the binomial tree to price
a noncallable three-year 5.25% annual coupon bond,
as shown in the diagram below.
Since it's the same diagram that appears in the week 8 lecture,
I'm not going to repeat the calculations here,
but I do recommend repeating the calculations on your own
for additional practice.
Now, in order to price an American call option with
a strike price, K, equal to 99.50 that can be exercised
at the end of either one or two years, we, as usual,
work backwards through the binomial tree.
In particular, at the end of two years, that
is when T equals 2 on the binomial tree model here,
the value of the call option is as follows.
In the up-up node at T equals 2, the value of the call option is
the maximum of the difference between the value of the bond
in the up-up node, which is equal to 98.588, here,
and the strike price K of 99.50 and 0, which is equal to 0.
Similarly, in the up-down or down-up node,
the value of the call option is equal to the difference between
99.732 --
that's the value of the bond in either the up-down or down-up
node here --
and the strike price of 99.50, which is equal to 0.232.
Finally, in the down-down at T equals 2,
the value of the call option is equal to the maximum
of the difference between 100.689,
the value of the bond in the down-down node --
here -- minus 99.5, the strike price, and 0,
which is equal to 1.189.
While the calculations were pretty straightforward
for the T equals 2 case, things are a little bit more
complicated at the end of one year, that is,
when T equals 1, since now we have
to compare the value of exercising the call option at T
equals 1 to the value of waiting to exercise the call
option at T equals 2.
In particular, at the up node at T equals 1, --
that is, this node here --

the value of waiting to exercise the call option at T equals 2
in the next period is equal to 0.5 --
that is the risk-neutral probability of an up move --
times 0 -- that is the value of the call option in the up-up
node at equals 2 --
plus 0.5 risk-neutral probability of a down move
times 0.232 --
that is the value of the call option at equals 2 in either
the up-down or down-up node. --
discounted as the interest rate of 4.976% in the up node at T
equals 1, which is equal 0.110.
On the other hand, the value of exercising the call option
immediately at T equals 1 is equal to the maximum
of the difference between the value of the bond in the up
node at T equals 1, V, which is equal to 99.461,
minus the strike price of the call option, which is 99.5,
and 0, which is equal to 0.

Thus, the value of the call option in the up node at T
equals 1 is the maximum of the value of waiting to exercise
the call option, 0.110, and the value of exercising the call
option immediately, which is equal to 0,
which is itself 0.110, as it is optimal to wait to exercise
the call option at T equals 2.
OK, now what about the down node at T equals 1 --
that is, this node here?
Well, the value of waiting to exercise the call option at T
equals 2 is equal to 0.5, the risk-neutral probability
of an up move, times 0.232 --
that is the value of the call option at T equals 2
in the up-down or down up-node --
plus 0.5, the risk-neutral probability of a down move,
times 1.19 --
that's the value of the call option in the down-down node
at T equals 2 --
discounted at the risk-free rate of 4.074% in the down node at T
equals 1, which is equal to 0.683.
On the other hand, the value of immediately exercising the call
option in the down node at T equals 1 is equal
to the maximum of the difference between the value
of the noncallable bond in the down node at T equals 1,
which is 101.333, minus the strike price of the call option
of 99.50 and 0, which is equal to 1.833.
Thus, the value of the call option in the down node
is equal to the maximum of the value of waiting
to exercise the call option at T equals 2, 0.683,
and the value of immediately exercising the call option
at the down node at T equals 1 of 1.833, which is equal
to 1.833, indicating that it is indeed
optimal to exercise the call option at T
equals 1 in the down node.
In the final step, we can find the overall value
of the American call option at T equals 0, the initial node,
to be as follows: the value of the call option is equal
to the risk-neutral probability of an up move, 0.5,
times the value of the call option of 0.110 in the up node
at T equals 1 plus the risk-neutral probability
of a down move from 0.5 times the value of the call option
in the down node at T equals 1 of 1.833,
which we just found here, discounted at the prevailing
interest rate at initiation of 3.5%, which is equal to 0.938.
All right, one last thing before we move on to the final topic.
Since we went over a lot of calculations
over the last few slides, I thought
I would include the following diagram here
on this slide that summarizes the value of the call option
at each node of the binomial tree,
as well as the prevailing interest rate at that node.
Hopefully, this is a useful diagram for your reference
as you work through these nodes.