
PROFESSOR: All right, let's finish the recitation
by reviewing the last topic, effective duration
and effective convexity.
Let's begin by recalling the definitions of modified
duration and convexity for an option-free bond from all
the way back in the week three lecture.
In particular, modified duration is
related to the first derivative of
the price-yield relationship.
It's negative, because prices move inversely with yields.
And it's equal to the first derivative dP of the price,
with respect to the yield dy, scaled by 1 over the price.
Convexity, on the other hand, is related
to the second derivative of the price-yield relationship.
Since most bonds have positive convexity,
the second derivative the price with respect to the yield,
scaled by 1 over the price, is positive.
Together, modified duration and convexity
could be used to approximate the price
change of a bond associated with a small change in yields.
So dP, the price change of the bond,
is approximately equal to negative Dm, which
is the modified duration of the bond, times its price, P,
times the change in yields, dy, plus 1/2 times the convexity
times the price of the bond times the change in yields
squared.
This ultimately comes from a second-order Taylor series
expansion of the price-yield relationship.
But those definitions only apply to bonds
without any embedded options.
How can we adjust our definitions
of modified duration and convexity for bonds
that have embedded options?
Well, since embedded options will affect the sensitivity
of bond prices to yields, we can use
effective duration and effective convexity instead.
These measures are ultimately estimated
using a model of how prices move with changes in yields.
For the option-free bonds that we considered
on the previous slide, the effective duration
and effective convexity will be exactly the same
as modified duration and standard convexity.
Effective duration and effective convexity
are very commonly-used in delta and gamma hedging strategies
that we reviewed in week three.
For example, hedging mortgage portfolios
requires using effective duration
and effective convexity, because the prepayment
option of a mortgage is a type of American call option.
Formally, we can define effective duration
as follows in equation one.
Effective duration is equal to 1 over the price of the bond
initially before interest rates change
times the difference between the price
of the bond after interest rates fall and the price of the bond
after interest rates rise divided
by 2 times s, where s is the amount the interest rates rise
or fall.
In the case of duration, this is for a level shift
in the yield curve.
Note that this equation one and definition
of effective duration is conceptually quite similar
to the definition of modified duration,
except now we replace the first derivative of the change
in the price of the bond for the change in yield
with its corresponding difference quotient.
Similarly, effective convexity is defined as 1
over the initial price of the bond times the difference
between the price after rates fall
minus the initial price of the bond
minus the difference between the initial price of the bond
minus the price after rates rise, now divided
by the change in interest rates squared.
Conceptually, this is, again, quite similar to the definition
of convexity we saw earlier, except now
the second derivative of the bond's price with respect
to the change in yields is replaced by its difference
quotient.
Just like before, we can use effective duration
and effective convexity to approximate the price
change of a bond with embedded options
for a small change in yields.
Equation three is identical to the equation that we
saw earlier, this one here, except now modified duration
and standard convexity are replaced
with effective duration and effective convexity.
All right, since those definitions
of effective duration and effective convexity
are rather abstract, let's see if we can illuminate things
with an empirical example.
Suppose that a mortgage-backed security
has an estimated price-yield relationship summarized
in the following figure.
Such a relationship like this usually
comes from a model that's estimated
using historical data.
In part a we are asked, if yields are currently
at 5.5%, what is the effective duration
and effective convexity for the mortgage-backed security?
Well, according to the figure, the price
of the mortgage-backed security is $97 when yields are at 5.5%.
So here, when the yield is 5.5%, the price per $100
face value is $97.
In order to apply equations one and equations two--
in order to find the effective duration and effective
convexity of the mortgage-backed security, respectively--
we can consider a 0.5% increase or decrease in yields.
So s is equal to 0.005 as a decimal.
A 0.5% increase or decrease in yields
is small enough such that the first-order
and second-order Taylor series expansions are justified.
From the figure, the price of the mortgage-backed security
is $100 when yields fall to 5%, so here.
And it's equal to $92 when yields rise to 6% here.
So from equation one, we can find the effective duration
of the mortgage-backed security as follows.
It's equal to 1 over the initial price--
well, $97 is the price when yields are 5.5%--
times the difference between the price when rates fall to 5%
of 100 minus the price when rates rise to 6%
of 92 divided by 2 times s, which is 2 times 0.005,
which is equal to 8.247.
Similarly, from equation two, the effective convexity
of the mortgage-backed security is 1 over the initial price
of 97 times the difference between the price after rates
fall of 100 minus the initial price of 97 minus the initial
price of 97 minus the price after rates rise of 92 divided
by 0.005 squared, which is equal to--
get ready-- negative 824.74.
In this case, the mortgage-backed security
actually has negative convexity.
And that's very different from what
we saw with most standard bonds earlier in this course.
This, however, is actually typical for mortgage bonds
as well as for callable bonds more
generally when yields are very low.
That is when they are more likely to be called.
All right, that ends recitation eight.
Thank you everyone for coming.
And I look forward to seeing you next week.