PROFESSOR: I've put together this introductory video
for those of you that may be relatively
new to the world of derivatives or interested in learning more
about the history, structure, and uses of these markets
and instruments.
We'll go over the answers to three basic questions.
What is a derivative?
How are derivatives traded?
And why are derivatives useful?
Derivatives are securities whose future payoffs
are tied by contract to some underlying variable.
That is, the payoffs are derived from or derivative
of some observable outcome.
Derivatives are also called contingent claims
because their payoffs are contingent on the outcome
of some underlying variable.
The underlying variable is usually
the price of a traded asset, such as a stock
or a stock index, an interest rate, or bond price,
or currencies, or commodities.
The underlying variable could also
be a property of asset prices such as the volatility
of the stock market or the maximum or minimum of a stock
price over some time period.
Or a derivative could have a payoff
based on a corporate decision such as the decision to default
on debt or on the level of dividends.
It could also be based on other natural or economic phenomenon
like how many inches of rain fall in December
or the inflation rate.
Some derivatives have a payoff tied
to two or more underlying variables,
like contracts for differences, whose payoffs depend
on the difference between two reference prices,
say the stock price of Apple versus the stock
price of Nokia.
The basic types of derivatives include forwards, futures,
swaps, options, and exotics.
The term exotic usually refers to options
that don't fall neatly into one of the standard categories.
We'll spend a week discussing some of these common exotics
and how their values can be determined.
To give a fun example of a derivative,
the website hsx.com offers foreign contracts
on the box office revenues of Hollywood film releases.
A foreign contract always has a payoff
based on what a price turns out to be at the expiration
date of the contract relative to the forward price
locked in initially.
These box office contracts are popular with film buffs that
want to speculate on their ability
to predict which films will be profitable
and which will be flops.
These contracts are for fun and not for real money.
But similar contracts could be used
to help film studios reduce the risk of uncertain revenues.
Derivatives are found in many places.
If you start looking for them, you'll soon
discover they're everywhere.
Many provisions are standalone instruments,
like the futures and options contracts traded on exchanges.
Others are issued by corporations.
Those include warrants, which give the holder the right
to buy shares of the corporation on some future date
at a pre-specified price, or employee stock options
that are a type of warrant granted to employees as part
of their compensation packages.
Then many derivatives are embedded in other securities.
For example, the owner of a callable bond
has a claim that's equivalent to having a portfolio consisting
of a regular bond plus a short position and a call option.
Repayable mortgages which allow homeowners to pay back
their mortgages prior to their maturity date
also contain an embedded call option.
A convertible bond has an embedded call option
on a stock.
And many structured notes call for contingent payoffs.
Securitization involves packaging together securities
and then issuing claims that have promised payoffs
that depend sometimes in complicated ways
on the realized cash flows from the package of the underlying
securities.
The outstanding supply of a particular derivative
depends on its origin.
For warrants, derivatives embedded in other securities,
and securitization-related derivatives,
the quantity of derivatives is fixed by the issuer.
By contrast, the quantity of standalone derivatives
is not constrained by the supply of the underlying
asset or commodity that the contract's based on.
Rather, it depends on the supply and demand
for the derivative contract in itself.
If a buyer and seller are both opening new positions,
the outstanding supply of that derivative increases by one.