
PROFESSOR: Now let's turn to how derivatives are traded.
Standalone derivatives are traded in two forms:
on exchanges and in the over-the-counter or OTC market.
Exchanges provide a central location,
either physical or electronic, where people come together
to buy or sell standardized contracts.
The over-the-counter market refers to bilateral trades that
usually are made between large financial firms, offering
derivatives, and the customers of those firms,
which themselves, are often other financial firms.
The OTC market is now the larger of the two.
But exchanges provide important benefits,
including more transparent price discovery and greater safety
from default risk.
A recent trend is towards convergence between the two
types of markets.
For example, collateral now is often required in OTC markets,
just as it always has been for exchange-traded instruments.
Regulators worldwide are forcing some OTC derivatives
to be settled through clearinghouses,
like those used by exchanges.
Clearing reduces the size of gross risk exposures, which
reduces the sort of systemic risk
that contributed to the global financial crisis of 2008.
Say, for example, Bob sells Miriam 10 futures
contracts and Miriam sells Bob seven of the same futures
contracts.
Clearing results in Bob having an obligation based on selling
three contracts to Miriam.
Without clearing, there would have
been more risk exposure with the 17 outstanding contracts.
It appears the derivatives may have been around for just about
as long as civilization itself.
They arise when a significant commercial or investment
risk creates a demand for insuring against that risk.
This slide highlights some interesting historical examples
--
from evidence showing that foreign contracts were
used in 2000 BCE in trade between India
and the Arab Gulf to ancient Greece where,
at least as far back as 300 BC, olive growers
use derivatives to reduce price risks associated
with future harvests, and to the famous Amsterdam tulip mania
in the 1630s where these financial instruments helped
protect at least some of the merchants
from the large price swings.
The exchanges that play such an important role
in today's derivatives markets got their start in Chicago
in the mid 1800s.
Since that time, there have been many changes and innovations,
including the addition of many new types of contracts
and the opening of new exchanges,
both in the United States and internationally.
The way trade is conducted on the exchanges has also changed
dramatically --
from open outcry with traders on the trading floor
shouting out their buy and sell orders to most trades today
taking place electronically via the computers of trading firms
located all over the world.
Not only has the physical process of trading gone
high tech, but the analytical innovations
in valuing derivatives, which are
one of the major focuses of this class,
have transformed the business of derivatives trading.
It's also worth you're knowing a little bit
about the growth of the derivatives markets
and the drivers of that growth.
For most of the last 50 years, the notional size
of the international derivatives market
has been growing exponentially, reaching an astronomical $700
trillion around the time of the global financial crisis
in 2008.
Since then, the market has remained enormous,
but growth has slowed down or even reversed.
That slowdown shouldn't be interpreted
as a falloff in the use of derivative contracts,
although some derivatives markets were slow to come back
after the crisis.
The main reason for the reduction in notional principal
has been the increased use of cleared contracts
and the related phenomenon of compression.
Recall our example of Bob and Miriam,
who would have created 17 futures contracts between them
without clearing, but with clearing, only
have three contracts because of the offsetting positions
that have canceled out.
What caused these markets to take off?
Commentators have pointed to a combination
of factors that include deregulation,
increased price volatility in important markets,
and technological innovation.
Deregulation contributed to price volatility,
for instance, when international agreements allowed exchange
rates between major currencies to float starting in 1971
or when natural gas prices were deregulated in the United
States in 1978.
OPEC policies caused oil prices to become very volatile
starting in the 1970s.
Technological progress, both in derivatives pricing
and in information technology, increased market efficiency
and access, which in turn, made the derivatives markets more
attractive.

The increases in price volatility were quite dramatic.
For example, as shown in these graphs,
there were a few changes in the price of oil and the 25 years
prior to 1973.
And the dollar-pound exchange rate
was almost constant prior to the late 1970s
when it was allowed to float.
As I mentioned earlier, there are now many derivatives
exchanges around the world.
However, much of the trading volume
remains concentrated in a small number of exchanges that are
domiciled in the United States.
The so-called open interest, reported in this table,
is the notional principle of all the outstanding futures
contracts, or options contracts in these different markets.
The daily average turnover is the dollar volume
of contracts traded.
One reason the trading is concentrated
on a small number of exchanges is
that liquidity is enhanced if more people are
trading in the same contract.
By choosing to trade on the exchange that has the highest
trading volumes, traders expect to obtain the best prices.
They can also take advantage of collateral offsets.
That makes its changes examples of natural monopolies,
where there's an economic advantage to concentrating
activity in a single firm.
Those efficiencies from centralization
make it difficult for new exchanges
to compete with established venues.

Derivatives' market participants can be divided into three broad
and non-exclusive categories--
end users, intermediaries, and financial engineers.
End users like corporation, use derivatives
to manage the risk exposures that
arise from the cost of inputs into production
or the demand for their products.
Financial institutions like banks,
manage their large interest rates,
currency, and credit risk exposures
that arise from the services they provide,
and from mismatches between the assets and liabilities
on their balance sheets.
Hedge funds used derivatives to take highly leveraged
positions, as do some individual traders, that
wish to make financial bets on particular economic outcomes.

Intermediaries, also called market makers,
help end users satisfy their demand for derivative products.
For example, dealers post buy and sell prices, also known
as bid and ask prices, for the derivatives contracts
that they make a market in.
They seek to make money from the difference between the bid
and ask prices.
The inventories the dealers wind up temporarily holding
expose them to unwanted risks.
When they manage those exposures using derivatives,
the intermediaries themselves become end users.
We'll work through an example of a dealer's risk management
problem and how it can be solved with derivatives
later in the class.
As we've seen, the markets for derivatives
continue to rapidly evolve with a steady flow of new product,
strategies, and technologies.
Those developments are often the work of financial engineers,
whose job it is to translate customers' risk management
challenges into new tools and customized products
and strategies that can help them
address the issues effectively and at as low
a cost as possible.
Financial engineering also allows
complex financial positions and transactions
to be understood in terms of equivalent derivative
positions, and to be accurately valued and understood as such.
