
PROFESSOR: Derivatives are a means
to transfer risk from those that are exposed to it to those that
are most willing to bear it.
We'll see that the same derivative contract can
be used to hedge or to speculate and for more or less
legitimate purposes, such as to avoid a costly business
risk, versus avoiding taxes or regulations.
Although some people believe derivatives
are harmful to society because of the way they can be misused
and the risks they can create, there's
a strong case for derivatives being
an overall positive contributor to risk management
and therefore to economic prosperity,
although regulatory guardrails are needed to prevent abuses.
I want to turn to four short and concrete examples of how
derivatives can solve risk management problems and also
a caution on how they have gotten companies
into trouble in the past.

The first example is a Swiss manufacturer of luxury watches
who agrees to deliver a shipment to a major US
retailer in December for the upcoming holiday season.
The watchmaker and retailer have negotiated
a payment of $10 million to be made to the watchmaker
upon delivery.
The problem for the Swiss manufacturer
is that the US dollar's value against the Swiss Franc
could deteriorate and reduce the Swiss firm's profit or even
result in a loss.
Currency futures can be used to eliminate this risk.
Specifically, the manufacturer can
enter into a long position in December Swiss Franc futures,
which will effectively lock in the exchange rate now
for the US dollar payments that will be made in the future.
The second example involves how to lock in profits
without having to realize a capital gain.
Imagine that Alpha Asset Management
has been investing in the stocks of a gold mining
company for the last five years and has an unrealized capital
gain of $50 million.
For tax reasons, the fund doesn't want to sell the shares
and realize the profits this year.
However, it's concerned that the stock price
might fall in the future.
The problem, then, is to find a way to lock in the profit
without selling the shares.
One way to do this is to buy an at-the-money put option that
allows the fund to sell the shares at the current price
on a future date in the event that the stock price falls
below its current price.
The third example puts you in the position
of a portfolio manager of an S&P 500 index fund.
You're evaluated based on the tracking errors--
that is, how closely your daily portfolio return tracks out
of the index.
When equity markets become more volatile, tracking the index
becomes more difficult, and tracking errors
tend to rise, which affects your performance and hence,
your compensation.
How can you insure yourself against the risk
of deteriorating tracking performance at times
of high volatility?
A solution is to enter into a variant swap
on the S&P 500 index, which pays off proportionally to increases
in market volatility.
Our last example involves the desire to speculate rather than
to hedge.
Say we're back in 2006.
If you were like me, you would have
believed that the housing market was overheated
and that a major correction in house prices
could cause large amounts of mortgage defaults,
leading to large losses, particularly on subprime loans.
Betting on this directly was impossible
because you can't short houses.
The stocks that were linked to housing were costly to short,
and their exposures might not be limited to subprime loans.
So how could you make a large-scale bet
against the housing market?
A solution used by the famous investor, John Paulson,
was to use a variety of financial derivative contracts.
He shorted collateralized debt obligations
whose performance depended on a pool of underlying mortgage
securities.
He also bought credit default swaps
that paid off when mortgages went bad,
and he sold short the ABX subprime index.
When house prices crashed over the next few years,
he came away with millions of dollars.
Unlike that outcome I just told you about for John Paulson,
stories about speculative derivative trades
often don't have a happy ending.
This is a list of some episodes involving
large speculative trades with derivatives that ended
in stunningly high losses.
The potential for large losses is often unrecognized
until it's too late to do anything about it,
and they can result in much broader adverse consequences.
For example, the losses incurred by Orange County
landed that wealthy municipality in Southern California
in bankruptcy.
Regulators strive to prevent these sorts of situations
by designing regulations to improve transparency and limit
the systemic risk that can cause spillovers of losses
into the larger economy.
While those regulations can help prevent some of those problems,
they can't eliminate them entirely.
It's always wise to make sure you understand your risk
exposure when you're dealing with derivatives, products,
and markets.
And hopefully, what you learn in this course
will help you do just that.