DEBORAH LUCAS: Hello, and welcome to 15.435x--
Derivatives Markets-- Advanced Modeling and Strategies.
I'm Deborah Lucas your professor for this fifth course
in the MIT Sloan MicroMasters program.
Derivatives are ubiquitous in the world
of finance and business.
In fact, more than 94% of Fortune 500 companies
report they use these powerful tools
to help manage their risk.
Developing a solid understanding of derivatives
is critical knowledge for some career paths in finance
and highly useful in others.
Clearly, a working knowledge of derivatives
is essential if you're dealing with them directly,
as you likely will be in some areas of sales and trading,
or if you're working at a hedge fund
or in some asset management or risk management roles.
Large financial institutions like insurance companies
and commercial and investment banks
are the single largest users of derivatives
in order to manage their own risk exposures.
They are also the largest providers
of derivatives products to the rest of the market.
These institutions employ many talented people
to carry out these tasks.
In other financial positions, such as in the CFO's office
in a large corporation or working in a family office,
you're more likely to be a consumer
of derivative products, where you'll
use them to help manage risks such as those
arising from stock market exposures or exchange rate
volatility.
Understanding derivatives is also increasingly important
in the world of public finance, for regulators
of financial institutions, and for
the many financial practitioners working
in central banks, treasury departments, and finance
ministries.
Beyond their practical value, many people
find the study of derivatives pricing models compelling
because of their elegance and because
of their track record of success at explaining
real-world outcomes.
I like to say derivatives pricing
is where physics meets finance.
That's because the models work so exceptionally well
and also because some of them are literal analogs of models
used in physics.
Although many of the models were developed using continuous time
mathematics and stochastic calculus,
the good news is that you don't have to be a rocket scientist
to understand and apply them to solving practical business
problems.
We will use math to help develop your basic understanding,
but the major emphasis will be on learning
to use these tools for valuation and risk management.
At MIT Sloan, we're also very proud of the fact
that many of the most famous derivatives
pricing models were invented right here.
Fischer Black and Bob Merton were both young faculty members
working at Sloan when, together with Myron Scholes at Chicago,
they developed the famous Black-Scholes-Merton options
pricing model.
And Bob Burton's early work showing
how the cost of default risk could be quantified
with a derivatives pricing approach
continues to be widely used by credit analysts today.
As a well-trained financial professional,
it's essential for you to be familiar
with derivative securities and with the analytical methods
that have been developed to understand and deploy them.
Helping you achieve that objective
is the overarching goal of this course.
The course will help you develop a sophisticated and durable
understanding of derivative modeling valuation and risk
management strategies, a basic familiarity with major markets
and instruments, and valuable insights
into current developments in these always-evolving markets.
Ideally, you will come away from this class
with the skills and confidence to apply
what you've learned to the new types of derivatives
that you encounter over the course of your career
and in your personal financial endeavors.
Derivatives have been a large part
of my academic and professional life.
I joined MIT Sloan's Finance group
as the Sloan Distinguished Professor of Finance
in 2010, and shortly after, became
the founding director of the MIT Golub Center
for Finance and Policy.
At Sloan, I teach two classes at the master's level
that emphasize derivatives--
Futures and Options and Fixed Income and Derivatives.
This course draws heavily from those electives.
I also teach advanced asset pricing
to PhD students in other special topics courses.
Professionally, my non-academic jobs
have primarily been in public policy, including
having been the chief economist for the US Congressional Budget
Office, or CBO, and then the founding assistant director
for CBO's Financial Analysis division,
a group which puts the tools you'll learn here
into practice to help inform Congress and the public
about the cost and risk of the trillions of dollars
of financial guarantees made by the US federal government.
I continue to do consulting for CBO, central banks,
and other international financial institutions
in this area.
I've also been a director on the boards
of several private financial institutions and corporations,
including currently serving on the board of Chicago Mercantile
Exchange, or CME, which is the world's largest derivatives
exchange and an important innovator in the derivatives
marketplace.
My research is closely aligned with my financial policy
work and the goals of the MIT Golub Center
for Finance and Policy.
It starts with the observation that governments
are the world's largest financial institutions
and the most influential financial decision makers.
My research aims to develop metrics to help governments
make better informed and more transparent
decisions based on the principles
of financial economics.
Many of the projects are related to derivatives,
such as valuing embedded derivatives and government
credit support and valuing too-big-to-fail bank
guarantees.
I'm looking forward to our journey
together through the world of derivatives
and hope you are too.
[MUSIC PLAYING]