PROFESSOR: In this video, I would
like to talk more specifically about the structure
of this course.
It is an instructor-paced course and we
will be releasing content each Wednesday
at 15:00 hours Coordinated Universal Time, or UTC.
We highly recommend that you subscribe to weekly emails
from the course team.
We use these emails to communicate
important information and these are the most efficient way
of staying up to date on important course information.
Please go to your dashboard and check your email settings
for this course.
Make sure to check the box to receive course emails.
Each week's content will have three components: lectures,
recitations, and problem sets.
Lecture videos deliver the main content
and introduce you to major concepts.
Lectures are accompanied by concept checks that
are designed to help you understand the material
of each learning module.
Recitations are designed to bridge the gap between lectures
and problem sets.
The recitation content will help you understand and apply
the relevant lecture concepts and will
help you solidify your understanding of the material.
Problem sets in this course are due each Wednesday
at 15:00 hours UTC.
You have exactly one week to finish problem sets.
As a matter of policy, homework deadlines will not be extended.
We do recognize, however, that circumstances
can arise that prevent you from meeting every single deadline,
and want to offer some flexibility.
Therefore, we will drop your lowest homework score
at the end of the course.
This course culminates with a two hour final exam.
This exam is a required assessment
for verified learners in this course.
And verified learners must take it
in order to be eligible for a course certificate.
The exam has to be taken within a specified window of time.
Please see the course schedule for details.
We're not able to accommodate exams outside of this window.
And therefore, we ask you to plan accordingly.
We would like to emphasize the importance
of working diligently and consistently
throughout the course.
Do not fall behind.
Content is cumulative.
And if you do not work consistently,
it will be difficult to catch up.
Data show positive correlation between consistent work
and final exam scores.
In other words, if you would like to get a higher grade,
you need to work consistently.
My advice to you is to start each week's work early
and to put effort into learning the material.
You should plan to spend at least 10 hours a week
to succeed in this course.
You will not pass this course if you spend two hours a week
on it.
Because of this time commitment, we
advise you to first realistically determine
if you can afford to spend this much time each week.
If you decide to take this course,
we strongly advise you to plan ahead and schedule time
each week to study and to work consistently.
We have an excellent course team who
will help you learn the content of the course.
To interact with the teaching team and your peers,
use the discussion forum.
The discussion forum is your one stop shop
designed to address all course related questions.
If you want to interact with your fellow learners,
or if you have questions that you would like
to ask the teaching team, we invite you
to participate in the forum.
A forum has two types of posts, a question or a discussion.
The difference between the two is as follows.
If you just want to share an insight or make a comment,
post your comment as a discussion.
However, if you would like to receive an answer,
then post it as a question.
Some specific tips.
Before asking a question, take time
to think about the material.
Rewatch the lecture video or a recitation video.
We have invested considerable resources
in making the content very clear.
So chances are, if you have a question,
the answer is already there.
When asking a question on the forum, be specific.
Provide a descriptive title so it is easy for your peers
to find your question and it's also easy for us
to understand what your question is about.
We have designated discussion points
at the end of each module.
So make sure to post the questions
in the relevant forum.
Always be polite and respectful.
We have learners from all corners of the world,
from different cultures and backgrounds.
Please be polite and respect each other.
We take ethics and professionalism very seriously.
During the final exam period, we will
close the discussion forum.
The final exam is individual work
and we do not allow learners to share information
and to collaborate.
We expect you to follow the honor code
and to uphold MIT's standards of academic integrity.
