
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to use a binomial tree model to price risky debt.
Consider a market with two possible states one year
from now: good or bad.
In the good state, the return on the market portfolio
will be 25%.
And in the bad state, the return on the market portfolio
will be negative 25%.
The probability of the good state is 70%.
The one-year, risk-free rate is 5%.
Consider a corporate bond.
It has a 0% coupon rate and matures one year from now.
The face value of the bond is $100.
In the good state, the bond has a 2% probability of default,
and a recovery rate of 60%.
In the bad state, the bond has a 10% probability of default,
and the recovery rate of 40%.
We will answer the following questions.
Compute the expected payoff of the bond in each of the two
states one year from now.
Determine the risk-neutral probabilities
of the good and bad states.
Compute the price of the corporate bond in year 0.
Compute the bond's promised yield,
expected yield, the default premium, and the risk premium.
Suppose that the CAPM holds.
Based on one-year returns, what is the market beta
of the corporate bond in this question?
Let's first compute the expected payoff of the bond one year
from now in the good state.
With 98% probability, the issuer of the bond will not default,
and we will get the full promised payment of $100.
With probability of 2%, the bond will default, in which case,
our recovery rate is 60%.
This means that we will receive 60% of the $100 that
was promised to us.
This gives us the expected payoff of $99.20.
Similarly, we can compute the expected payoff of the bond one
year from now in the bad state.
With 90% probability, the bond will not default,
and we will get $100.
With probability 10%, the bond will default. In this case,
we recover 40% of the $100 face value.
This gives us the expected payoff of $94.

Next, let's find the risk-neutral probabilities
of the good and bad states.
Recall that the market portfolio one year from now
either goes up by 25% or goes down by 25%.
Using our standard notation, this
implies that multiple u is 1.25 and multiple d is 0.75.
The risk-neutral probability of the up-move
is 1 plus r f minus d divided by u minus d.
Risk-free rate is 5%.
u is 1.25, and d is 0.75, which gives us
the risk-neutral probability of the up move of 60%.
This implies that the risk-neutral probability
of the down move is 40%.
Knowing risk-neutral probabilities
and expected payoffs from the bond
in the good and bad states, we can price this bond today.
Its current price equals the expected payoff one year
from now under the risk-neutral measure
discounted to present at the risk-free rate.
Plugging in the numbers from parts a and b of this question,
we find that the current price of this bond is $92.50.
Next, let's find the promised yield
on this bond, the expected yield, the default premium,
and the risk premium.
Since this bond pays no coupons and matures one year from now,
its promised yield equals its face value divided
by its current price minus 1.
Plugging in the numbers, we find that the promised
yield on this bond is 8.11%.
To compute the expected yield on this bond,
instead of using the face value that was promised to us,
we're using the payoff we expect to receive from this bond.
The expected payoff in year one is the physical probability
of the good state, which is 70%, multiplied by the expected
payoff in the good state, which is $99.20,
plus the physical probability of the bad state, which is 30%,
multiplied by the expected payoff in the bad state,
which is $94.
We see that the expected yield on this bond is 5.56%.
The default premium, by definition,
is the difference between the promised yield and the expected
yield.
In our case, this is 8.11% minus 5.56%, which equals to 2.55%.
The risk premium is the difference
between the expected yield and the risk-free rate.
In our case, this is 5.56% minus 5%, which equals to 0.56%.
Therefore the default premium on this bond is 2.55%,
and the risk premium of this bond is 0.56%.
Finally let's find CAPM beta of this bond.
Recall by CAPM, the expected return on this bond,
which is its expected yield, equals to the risk-free rate
plus beta of this bond multiplied by the market risk
premium.
We know the expected yield.
And we know the risk-free rate.
We need to find the expected return on the market portfolio
so that we can solve this equation for beta.
The expected return on the market
equals to the probability of the good state, which
is 70%, times the return in the good state, which
is 25%, plus the probability of the bad state, which is 30%,
times the return in the bad state, which is negative 25%.
This gives us the expected return of 10%.
Solving the CAPM equation for beta,
we find that the beta of this bond is 0.1124.
Note that this beta is very close to zero,
implying that this bond has very low systematic risk.
Because of this, the risk premium on this bond,
which we found in part d of this question, is low.
Only 56 basis points.
