
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider corporate financial transaction known
as leveraged recapitalization and we
will determine its impact on equity of the firm.
Teradyne is automatic test equipment designer
and manufacturer located in Boston, Massachusetts.
It is currently an all-equity firm
with an expected return of 12%.
It is considering a leveraged recapitalization
in which it would borrow and repurchase existing shares.
Suppose Teradyne borrows to the point
that its debt-equity ratio is 0.5.
With this amount of debt, the debt cost of capital is 6%.
What will the expected return on equity
be after this transaction?
To answer this question, first, note
that since Teradyne is currently all-equity firm,
it's expected return on equity and assets are the same,
and both equal to 12%.
Second, recall the Modigliani-Miller proposition
II, which states that return on equity
equals the return on assets plus debt equity ratio multiplied
by the difference between the expected return on assets
and debt.
Recall that the return on assets of Teradyne is 12%.
Under the proposed capitalization plan,
the debt equity ratio is 0.5 and the cost of debt is 6%.
This gives us the return on equity of 15%.
Therefore, if there Teradyne proceeds
with this leverage recapitalization plan,
its expected return on equity will increase from 12% to 15%.
Suppose instead, Teradyne borrows to the point
that its debt-equity ratio is 1.5.
With this amount of debt, Teradyne's debt
will be much riskier.
As a result, the debt cost of capital will be 8%.
What will the expected return on equity be in this case?
Using the Modigliani-Miller proposition II
with debt equity ratio of 1.5 and cost of debt of 8%,
we obtained the new expected return on equity, which is 18%.
We see that the higher amount of debt
increases the expected return on equity of Teradyne.
One of senior managers argues that option B
is in the best interest of shareholders
because it leads to high expected return on the stock.
How would you respond to this argument?
Your response should point out that option B leads
to high expected return on equity
because under larger debt load, equity becomes riskier.
Returns are higher because the risk is higher.
The higher return simply compensates our shareholders
for this additional risk.
In other words, there is no free lunch.
If our shareholders want to obtain higher expected return,
they can do so themselves through transactions
in the financial market.
