
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
show how to estimate the cost of capital
for divisions in a multidivisional firm.
The Brandywine Corporation has two divisions of equal market
value: the brandy division and the wine division.
The debt-to-equity ratio of Brandywine is 2 to 9.
The company's debt is risk free.
For the last few years, the brandy division
has been using a discount rate of 11%
in capital budgeting decisions, while the wine division has
been using a discount rate of 10%.
The current risk-free rate is 5%,
and the expected rate of return on the market portfolio is 10%.
We will answer the following questions.
What is the beta of typical projects
implicit in the discount rate used by the brandy division?
What is the beta of typical projects
implicit in the discount rate used by the wine division?
What is the equity beta of Brandywine
that is consistent with the discount rates used
by Brandywine's two divisions?
Let's start by computing the beta of the brandy division.
Since we're given the discount rate,
we can use the CAPM to back out the beta.
The discount rate used by the brandy division is 11%.
The risk-free rate is 5%.
And the expected return on the market portfolio is 10%.
This gives us beta of 1.2.
We can repeat the process for the wine division.
The discount rate used by the wine division is 10%.
This implies the beta of 1.
Note that the discount rate used by the wine division
is the same as the return on the market portfolio.
Therefore, it has to have a beta of 1.
Next, let's find the equity beta of Brandywine
that is implied by the discount rates used by the brandy
and wine divisions.
In order to do that, we first need
to find asset beta of Brandywine.
Asset beta of Brandywine equals to the weighted average
of asset betas of its divisions.
Since both divisions have equal market value,
their weight in Brandywine is 0.5 for both of them.
Given the betas of brandy and wine divisions,
we find that asset beta of Brandywine is 1.1.
To find equity beta of Brandywine,
we will use Modigliani-Miller proposition 2.
Recall the debt-to-equity ratio of Brandywine is 2 to 9,
and its debt is risk free, which implies debt beta of 0.
Combining these with Brandywine's asset beta of 1.1,
we find that equity beta of Brandywine is 1.34.
Supposed that you were hired as a consultant
to advise on the use of discount rates
in the brandy and wine divisions of Brandywine.
As the first step, you have estimated equity beta
and confirmed that it equals to 1.34.
Next, you found a publicly traded firm
called Pure Brandy Corporation, which operates in the brandy
business.
You have estimated its equity beta
and found that it equals to 1.8.
The debt-to-equity ratio of Pure Brandy is 1 to 4,
and its debt beta is 0.2.
What discount rates would you recommend
for projects in the brandy and in the wine
division of Brandywine?
Let's start by making two observations.
First, since you confirmed that the equity beta of Brandywine
is 1.34, this means that asset beta of Brandywine is 1.1.
Second, we can find betas for each division of Brandywine
by using the information on Pure Brandy Corp.
Let's find asset beta of Pure Brandy.
Recall that asset beta is the weighted average
of debt and equity betas.
The debt-to-equity ratio of Pure Brandy is 1 to 4.
This means that debt-to-value ratio is 1 to 5,
and equity-to-value ratio is 4 to 5.
Recall that debt beta of Pure Brandy is 0.2,
and its equity beta is 1.8.
This gives us the asset beta of 1.48.
Now, we can use asset beta of Brandywine
and the asset beta of Pure Brandy
to back out asset beta of the wine division.
Recall that asset beta of Brandywine is 1.1.
Asset beta of Pure Brandy division, which we just found,
is 1.48, and the division weights are 50%.
This gives us wine beta of 0.72.
We can see that the business risk of brandy division,
as measured by asset beta, is more than twice
as high as the business risk of the wine division.
Knowing asset betas, we can find discount rates using the CAPM.
For the brandy division, you should advise the firm
to use the discount rate of 12.4% instead of 11%
that they traditionally have used.
And, for the wine division, you should advise the firm
to use the discount rate of 8.6% instead of 10%
that they have traditionally used.
