
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how to estimate a weighted average cost of capital
for a firm in a situation when the firm does not
pay corporate income tax.
Recall that this is one of the assumptions
in the Modigliani-Miller theorem.
Later in the course, we will relax this assumption.
Suppose that you work as an equity analyst
at an investment bank.
You need to find a weighted average cost of capital
for a firm, which you will use in your valuation model.
You found the following information for this firm.
It is financed with equal amount of debt and equity.
In other words, its debt-to-equity ratio is 1.
Its cost of debt is 3.5%.
You have also estimated equity beta of this firm
and found that it equals to 1.2.
The economic forecasting division of your bank
advises you to use the market risk premium of 6%
and the risk-free rate of 2% in your model.
Suppose that the assumptions of the Modigliani-Miller theorem
hold.
In particular, assume that corporations do not
pay corporate income taxes.
What is the weighted average cost of capital of this firm?
Let's start with the definition of the Weighted Average
Cost of Capital or WACC.
It equals to the fraction of debt in the firm's capital
structure multiplied by the cost of debt
plus the fraction of equity in the firm's capital structure
multiplied by the cost of equity.
The fraction of debt is measured by the ratio of debt
to firm value, which is the sum of debt and equity.
And the fraction of equity is measured by the ratio of equity
to firm value.
We know that debt-to-equity ratio equals to 1.
And we know that cost of debt equals to 3.5%.
Therefore, in order to find WACC,
we need to find the cost of equity.
To find the cost of equity, we will use the capital asset
pricing model.
Recall that you were advised by your colleagues
in the economic forecasting department
to use the risk-free rate of 2% and the market risk
premium of 6%.
Recall also that you have estimated equity beta
and found that it equals 1.2.
These inputs imply that the cost of equity of this firm is 9.2%.
As a final step, we need to find the fraction of debt
and the fraction of equity in the firm's capital structure.
In other words, we need to find the ratio of debt
to debt plus equity and the ratio of equity
to debt plus equity.
Recall that we are given only debt-to-equity ratio.
Let's rearrange debt to debt plus equity ratio.
First, divide the numerator and the denominator
by D. We get 1 divided by the sum of 1
plus equity-to-debt ratio.
Second, flip equity-to-debt ratio,
and write it as 1 divided by debt-to-equity ratio.
We know that debt-to-equity ratio equals to 1.
Hence, the debt-to-debt plus equity ratio
equals to 1 divided by 1 plus 1 divided
by 1, which equals to 1/2.
This means that the fraction of debt in this firm is 50%.
This should not surprise us.
If this firm is equally financed with debt and equity,
then the fraction of debt in this firm
has to be equal to 50%.
Same holds for the fraction of equity.
It equals to 50% as well.
Putting this all together, we can compute the WACC.
It equals to the fraction of debt,
which is 1/2, times the cost of debt, which
is 3.5%, plus the fraction of equity, which is also 1/2,
times the cost of equity, which is 9.2%.
This gives us the WACC of 6.35%.
