
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider an example of a firm with multiple tiers of debt
in its capital structure and learn
how to price debt and equity in such circumstances.
Suppose that there are two possible states of the economy
next year: good and bad.
The good state occurs with probability 80%,
and the bad state occurs with probability 20%.
Consider a small firm whose assets in year 1
will be worth $90 million in the good state and $40 million
in the bad state.
This firm has two bonds outstanding, bond 1 and bond 2.
Both bonds pay 0% coupon and mature in year 1.
The face value of bond 1 is $40 million,
and the face value of bond 2 is $10 million.
Bond 2 is junior to bond 1.
This means that, in the event of default, holders of bond 2
do not receive any payment until holders of bond 1
receive their promised payment in full.
We will assume that the one year risk-free rate is 5%
and that corporations do not pay corporate income taxes.
Suppose that the current market value of equity
is $28.57 million.
What are the current prices of bonds 1 and 2
and their promised yields?
What are the expected returns on both bonds and equity
of this firm?
Let's start by finding what the holders
of both bonds and equity receive in each state of the economy.
Recall that the face value of bond 1 is $40 million.
And this bond is the most senior claim on this firm's assets.
Since the assets are worth $90 million
in the good state and $40 million in the bad state,
holders of bond 1 will receive their full promised payment
of $40 million in both states.
Holders of bond 2, however, will not receive anything
in the bad state because the assets of the firm
will be worth zero after the firm makes the payment
to holders of bond 1.
The firm will default on its promised payments
to the holders of bond 2.
Equity holders are residual claimants on firm's assets.
In the good state, they receive $40 million of the payments
to holders of bond 1 and bond 2 are made in full.
In the bad state, however, the value of equity
is zero since the value of assets
is large enough only to satisfy the claim of holders of bond 1.
To price both of these bonds, let's start
by finding risk-neutral probabilities
of the up and down states.
We don't know the current value of the firm.
However, we know its current value of equity.
It is $28.57 million.
Therefore, we can use the current value of equity,
together with the risk-free rate,
to find risk-neutral probabilities.
We can write down the following equation.
The current value of equity should
equal to the risk-neutral probability
of the up state multiplied by the equity value
in the up state plus the risk-neutral probability
of the down state multiplied by the value of equity
in the down state discounted to present at the risk-free rate.
Note that the value of equity in the down state is zero.
Solving this equation for qu, we get 0.75.
This means that the risk-neutral probability of the up state
is 75%, and the risk-neutral probability of the down state
is 25%.
Knowing risk-neutral probabilities,
we can find current prices of bonds 1 and 2.
The price of bond 1 equals to the risk-neutral probability
of the up state, which is 0.75, times the payoff
from the bond in the up state, which is $40 million,
plus the risk-neutral probability of the down state,
which is 0.25, times the payoff from the bond
in the down state, which is also $40 million,
discounted to present at the risk-free rate.
Since this bond pays face value in both states,
its price effectively equals to the face value
discounted to present at the risk-free rate.
It is easy to understand why.
This bond never defaults and always pays in full.
Therefore, it is effectively a risk-free bond.
The price of bond 2 equals qu multiplied
by 10 plus qd multiplied by 0 discounted to present
at the risk-free rate.
This gives us $7.14 million.
The promised yield on the first bond
is simply 5% because this bond is risk free.
The promised yield on the second bond
is its face value, which is $10 million,
divided by its current price, which is $7.14 million,
minus 1.
This equals to 40%.
This high yield indicates the riskiness of this bond.
Note that, in the down state, holders of this bond
incur a 100% loss rate.
Finally, let's find expected returns
on both bonds and equity of this firm.
The expected return on bond 1 is 5% simply
because it is risk free.
The expected return on bond 2 equals its expected payoff,
which is physical probability of the up
state, 80%, times the payoff in the up state, which
is $10 million, plus physical probability of the down state,
20%, times the payoff in the down state, which is 0,
divided by the current bond price minus 1.
This gives us 12%.
We can decompose the promised yield of the second bond, which
is 40%, into the default premium, risk premium,
and the risk-free rate of return.
We see that the default premium is 28%, four times as large
as the risk premium, which is 7%.
Finally, the expected return on equity of this firm
equals to the expected payoff, which is 80% times $40 million
plus 20% times 0, divided by the current price, which
is $28.57 million, minus 1.
This gives us 12%.
Note that the risk premium on equity of this firm
and on bond 2 are the same.
This should not be surprising because both equity and bond 2
only pay in the up state.
And, in the down state, they're both worthless.
In other words, bond 2 and equity of this firm
are effectively identical securities.