
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
consider a corporate acquisition and learn
how to estimate the risk of equity of the merged entity.
Suppose that corporation Y is planning
to acquire corporation X. We are given the following information
on firm X.
Its market value of debt is $40 million.
Its market value of equity is $160 million.
Its cost of debt capital is 7%.
And its equity beta is 1.2.
We are also given the following information on firm
Y. Its market value of debt is $100 million.
Its market value of equity is $900 million.
Its debt is risk free.
And its asset beta is 0.76.
Transaction details are as follows.
Y will be financing the acquisition
with the issuance of new debt.
The old debt of X will be repurchased.
The cost of debt for the combined entity will be 8%.
X will get acquired at the current market value,
and there will be no synergies in this transaction.
We are also given the following additional information.
Risk-free rate is 5%.
The expected return on the market portfolio is 15%.
Corporations do not pay income taxes.
And there are no other market imperfections.
What is the equity beta and the expected return
on equity of firm Y after this acquisition is complete?
Let's start by thinking how to approach solving this problem.
First, to find equity risk of the combined entity,
we would need to know its capital structure
and its return on assets.
We will be able to figure out the capital
structure of the combined firm from the information
on the current capital structure of firms X and Y
and on how Y is planning to finance
the acquisition of X. The return on assets of the combined
entity is equal to the weighted average of returns on assets
of firms X and Y. Therefore, to find it,
we first need to find return on assets of X and Y.
With this in mind, we will implement the following steps
to solve this problem.
First, we will find asset beta of firm X.
Note that we already know asset beta of firm Y. Second,
we will find the asset beta of the new combined entity.
And, third, we will find equity beta and the return
on equity of the new firm.
Let's start with asset beta of firm X. Recall
that asset beta is the weighted average of debt and equity
betas.
We know the market values of debt and equity of firm x
as well as its equity beta.
Therefore, in order to find asset beta,
we need to find debt beta first.
To find debt beta, we will use the capital asset pricing
model.
Recall that the cost of debt capital of firm X is 7%.
The risk-free rate is 5%.
And the expected return on the market portfolio is 15%.
Solving this equation for beta, we
find that debt beta of firm X equals to 0.2.
Having found debt beta, we can now
find asset beta of firm X. Recall
that the market value of debt of firm X is $40 million.
The market value of its equity is $160 million.
And its equity beta is 1.2.
Therefore, asset beta of firm X equals to 1.
Let's now move to step two and find asset beta of the combined
firm.
Asset beta of the combined firm equals to the weighted average
of betas of the merging firms where the weights
are computed based on the market values of firms X and Y
in the combined firm.
The market value of firm X is computed
by adding its market value of debt, which is $40 million,
and its market value of equity, which is $160 million.
Hence, the market value of firm X is $200 million.
For firm Y, recall that its market value of debt
is $100 million, and its market value of equity
is now $900 million.
Therefore, the market value of firm Y is $1 billion.
Recall also that asset beta of firm X, which we just computed,
is 1.
And the asset beta of firm Y is 0.76.
Therefore, the asset beta of the combined firm is 0.8.
Now, we are ready to implement the final step, step three.
To find equity beta, we will use Modigliani-Miller proposition
2, which states that equity beta equals to the asset
beta plus debt-to-equity ratio multiplied
by the difference between asset beta and debt beta.
We know asset beta.
So what's left to find is the debt-to-equity ratio and debt
beta of the new firm.
To find debt-to-equity ratio of the new firm,
we need to find its value of debt and its value of equity.
Let's start with debt.
The new value of debt will be the value
of the old debt of the acquiring firm, which
is firm Y, plus the value of new debt issued to acquire firm X.
To acquire firm X, we need to purchase its equity, which
is valued at $160 million, and to purchase its existing debt,
which is valued at $40 million.
Therefore, we need to issue $200 million of new debt.
This implies that the total value of debt of the new firm
will be $300 million.
To find the value of equity of the combined firm,
we subtract the value of debt from the value of the firm,
which gives us $900 million.

Therefore, debt-to-equity ratio of the new firm will be 1/3.
To find debt beta of the new firm, we will use the CAPM.
Recall that the cost of debt of the new firm will be 8%.
Given the risk-free rate of 5% and the return
on the market portfolio of 15%, we
find that debt beta of the new firm will be 0.3.
Having found debt-to-equity ratio and debt beta,
we can finally find equity beta of the new firm.
We find that it equals 0.967.
To find the expected return on equity of the new firm,
we will use the CAPM.
This slide shows that the expected return will be 14.67%.
