
PROFESSOR: Without further ado, let's begin with problem one.
Problem one says to consider two 7% annual coupon
corporate bonds each with one year until maturity.
Both bonds are expected to default with a 20% probability.
Investors demand a risk adjusted expected return
of 4.5% on both bonds, and the only difference between the two
bonds is that, in the event of default,
the expected recovery rate on the first bond
is 75% whereas the expected recovery
rate on the second bond is 25%.

Use this information to estimate the difference
in the quoted yields to maturity between the two bonds.

Well, before we solve the problem,
let's first get some notation out of the way.
Let P sub 1 be the value of the first bond that
has the expected recovery rate of 75%,
and P sub 2 be the value of the second bond
with the expected recovery rate of 25%.
Assume that both bonds in this example
have a face value of 100.
Since there's one year until maturity on both bonds,
the holder of each bond will receive its face value of 100
plus a terminal coupon payment of 7
if the bond doesn't default, which occurs 100 minus 20,
which is equal to 80% of the time.
If the first bond defaults, then the holder of the bond will
receive 75% --
the expected recovery rate --
times the terminal payoff of 100 of the face value
plus the terminal coupon of 7, which is equal to 80.25.
On the other hand if the second bond defaults,
the holder of the bond will receive 25% --
it's expected recovery rate --
times 107, which is equal to 26.75.
Thus, we can solve for P1, the price of the first bond,
as 0.8, which is the probability that the bond doesn't default,
times 107, its terminal payoff, discounted at the risk adjusted
interest rate of 4.5%, plus 0.2, the probability
that the bond does default, times its expected recovery
rate of 75% times it's terminal payoff of 107,
also discounted at the risk adjusted
interest rate of 4.5%, which is equal to 97.273.
A similar calculation for the price of the second bond
yields a price of 87.033.
The only difference here is that now the expected recovery
rate if the bond does default is equal to 25% rather than 75%.
Finally, we can find the yield-to-maturity of each bond
as follows.
The yield-to-maturity, for instance on the first bond,
is the single interest rate that equates
the present value of the bond on the left hand
side with its price.
Solving the first equation for Y1,
we find that the yield to maturity
on the first bond that has the higher expected recovery rate
is 10%.
A similar calculation shows that the yield
to maturity on the second bond that has the lower recovery
rate is 22.94.
Thus, the difference between these two yields is 12.94.
Intuitively, the higher yield on the second bond,
that is, the bond with the lower recovery rate,
reflects its greater credit risk.
