
PROFESSOR: All right, let's move on to problem two.
Problem 2 states that your firm owns 1,000 shares of ABC stock
and is now seeking a loan using the stock as collateral.
The current market price of the stock is $80 per share.
And you have just been offered a loan
of $80,000, the full current value of the stock
at an interest rate of 25% per period.
At the end of each of the next two periods,
your firm will owe an interest payment of $20,000.
The first payment is due one period from now.
The principal on the loan is due three periods from now.
So at that time your firm will own
a total payment of $100,000.
The 1,000 shares of stock will serve as the sole collateral
for the loan.
If your firm defaults on any of its payments,
the lender will immediately take possession of the stock
but will have no further claim on any
of your firm's other assets.
A default on this special arrangement
will have no effect whatsoever on the other activities
of the firm.

The APC stock pays no dividends, and over each period,
its value will either increase by 50% or decrease by 50%
with the risk neutral probability
of an up move equal to 60%.
Equivalently, the risk neutral probability of a down move
is equal to 40%.
The interest rate on default free, risk free loans
is 10% per period.
Is this loan an attractive opportunity for your firm?
First, consider the value of a default free bond
that has the same promise payments as the proposed loan.
Its value would be equal to the $20,000 interest payment one
period from now discounted at the 10% default free
or risk free interest rate plus the $20,000 interest
payment two periods from now discounted
at 10% plus the $100,000 face value of the default free bond
discounted at 10%, which is equal to $109,842, which
is substantially greater than the $80,000
that your firm would receive for undertaking the same promised
payments with the proposed loan.
However, your firm would also have a valuable option
to cancel the proposed loan at any time
by surrendering the underlying collateral, the ABC stock.
Defaulting in this way would be in the firm's interest
whenever the value of the remaining payments on the loan
exceeds the value of the collateral.
Thus, the proper value of the remaining payments
must reflect the fact that even if the current payment
on the loan is made, default may still occur on one or more
of the future payments.
Thus, the current value of the remaining payments of the loan
will depend on the value of the collateral.
Since we have a binomial model, the following diagram
shows the possible prices for the underlying collateral,
the 1,000 shares of ABC stock over the next three periods
along with the corresponding possible values of the loan
at its maturity date.
This is this last column on the right here.
The last three values in that column 90, 30, and 10 reflect
the fact that default will occur in those circumstances
because the value of the underlying collateral of 90,
30, and 10 is less than the face value of the loan of 100.
All values in the diagram are in thousands
of dollars for simplicity.
As always, with the binomial tree,
we solve the problem by working backwards.
Let V of S and n be the value of the current and future payments
on the loan in thousands of dollars
when the stock price is equal to S,
and there are end periods remaining until maturity.
Beginning with the n equals one case,
that is these three nodes here, we have the following.
The value of the current and future payments on the loans
in the node of the binomial tree when the stock
price is equal to 180.
And there's one period remaining, this node here,
is equal to the minimum of 180, the value
of the underlying collateral, and 20, the interest
payment in that period plus 60%, which
is the risk neutral probability of an up move times 100, which
is the value of the loan in the terminal node here
plus 40% risk neutral probability of a down move
times 90, the value of the loan in this terminal node here
discounted at the risk free rate of 10%, which
is equal to 107.27.
In the node of the binomial tree when the underlying stock is
equal to 60 with one period remaining,
this node here, the value of the current and future payments
on the loan is equal to the minimum of 60,
the value of the underlying collateral,
and 20, the interest payment plus 60% times now 90,
which is the value of the loan in this node here
plus 40% times 30, the value of the loan in this node here
discounted at 10%, which is equal to 60.
A similar calculation for the node
of the tree when the value of the underlying stock
is equal to 20 with one period remaining,
this node here, suggests that the value
of the current and future payments on the loan
at that node is equal to 20.
Thus, the optimal choice for the firm
is to default on the loan at the nodes where S equals 60 or 20
at n equals 1, these two here.
Now, we can do a similar calculation
for the n equals 2 case, that is when there
are two periods remaining until maturity, which corresponds
to these two nodes here on the binomial tree
and find that the value of the current and future payments
on the loan at the node of the tree where the stock price is
120 is equal to the minimum of 120,
value of the underlying collateral,
and 20, the interest payment plus 60% the risk neutral
probability of an up move times 107.27.
Which is the value of the current and future payments
on the loan at this node here, the up node from 120 plus 40%
the risk neutral probability of a down move
times 60 the value of the current and future payments
on the loan at this node here discounted
at the risk free rate of 10%, which is equal to 100.33.
A similar calculation for the node
of the tree where the underlying stock price is equal to 40
gives a value of 40.
Thus, the optimal choice for the firm
is to default on the loan at the node where S equals 40 at n
equals 2 since this is less than the face value of 100.
Finally, at the initial node of the tree,
that is when n equals 3 and S is equal to 80, this node here.

The value of the current and future payments on the loan
is equal to the minimum of the underlying asset price of 80
plus the risk neutral probability of an up
move times the value of the current and future payments
on the loan in the subsequent up node, which we found
was 100.33, plus the risk neutral probability
of a down move times 40.
The value of the current and future payments
on the loan and the subsequent down node,
which we just found here, discounted at the risk
free rate of 10%, which is equal to 69.27, or $69,270.
So overall, the loan is actually an attractive opportunity
for your firm.
You have been offered $80,000 for a series
of contingent future payments that
has a current fair value of only $69,270.
And that's a really good deal.