
PROFESSOR: That does it for Problem 3.
Let's finish the recitation by reviewing Problem 4.
In Problem 4, it stated that your boss asks you
for a quick price estimate for a credit
guarantee on the risky bond of a publicly traded firm.
You have the following information.
First, that the Treasury yield curve
is flat at 4% on a continuous basis.
Second, the bond to be guaranteed a zero coupon
and has a face value of $50 million.
It matures in 3.25 years and it is the only debt of the firm.
The credit guarantee ensures payment
to the holder of the full face value at maturity.
Third the firm has 5.11 million shares of equity outstanding
currently priced at $10.69 per share.
The equity volatility is 25% per year.
And fourth, using the Merton model for valuing risky debt,
you conclude that the market value of assets is $95 million
and the asset volatility is 12% per year.
Based on all this information, what
is your best estimate of the value of the credit guarantee?
Now, this problem is tricky because although we
threw a lot of information at you,
you actually don't need to apply either the Merton model
or to build a binomial tree in order to solve the problem.
The first step in solving the problem
is to simply recall from the Week 9 lecture
that the Merton model relies on the relationship
that A equals E plus D, where A is the market
value of the firm's assets, E is the market value
of the firm's equity, and D is the market value
of the firm's debt.
From the information provided, we
can compute the market value of the firm's equity,
or E, to be equal to $10.69, the price per share,
times 5.11 million shares outstanding,
which is equal to $54.519 million.
Since the market value of the firm's assets is $95 million
according to the Merton model, we
can infer that D, which is equal to A minus E,
is equal to $95 million minus $54.519 million,
which is equal to $40.481 million.
Now, as we saw in the Week 9 lecture,
the value of a credit guarantee on a risky bond
is equal to the difference between the hypothetical price
of the promised payments of the bond,
if they were, in fact, risk-free,
and the price of the risky bond.

If the firm's debt were in fact risk-free,
then its price would be equal to 50--
so the $50 million face value the bond--
times the exponential of negative 0.04,
since the risk-free rate is 4% on a continuous basis, times
3.25, since the debt has 3.25 years to maturity, which
is equal to $43.905 million.
Thus, the credit guarantee is estimated
to be worth 43.905 minus 40.481, that's the market
value of the firm's debt according
to the Merton model, which is equal to $3.424 million.
Pretty simple, right?
All right, that concludes Problem 4 and the Week 9
recitation.
Thank you everyone for coming and I look forward
to seeing you one more time next week.