
PROFESSOR: Our second example is a famous model
developed by Fama and French.
We're going to use a couple of papers from 1993 and '96
to describe their construction.
In, this model, factors are not driven
by macroeconomic variables.
Or rather, they're not explicitly defined
in terms of macroeconomic variables.
But instead, factors are constructed
as portfolios of stocks.
In other words, in this analysis,
we directly build factor-mimicking portfolios
rather than starting with the economically motivated factors.

Fama and French design their factor-mimicking portfolios
by sorting firms on two characteristics--
size and the book-to-market ratio.
Size in this case corresponds to the market capitalization
of the stock.
And the book-to-market ratio is the ratio of the book value
of equity to its market value.
The idea, the premise behind this construction,
is that firms with different characteristics-- small firms
versus large firms, high book-to-market firms
versus low book-to-market firms have different exposures
to important macroeconomic factors.
And therefore, by sorting these characteristics
and by building portfolios, we can
construct mimicking portfolios for the underlying macro
factors.
Of course, we don't quite know what these factors are,
but we can nonetheless use the mimicking portfolios
in a statistical manner to build factor models.
We end up with a three-factor model.
The first factor is the value-weighted market return
minus the return on the T-Bill.
We call it RM minus Rf.
The second factor, which is called SMB, small minus big,
is a long-short portfolio, which has long small-cap stocks
and short large-cap stocks.
The third portfolio, HML, or high minus low,
is a portfolio which has long high book-to-market firms
and short low book-to-market firms.
High book-to-market firms are what is called value firms.
And the low book-to-market firms are called growth firms.
So this is a value minus growth portfolio.
These portfolios-- the market minus the risk-free rate,
small minus big, and high minus low--
seem to earn significant risk premia.
Over the sample period considered in the paper,
the risk premium on the market is 0.43%,
the premium on the SMB portfolio is 0.27%,
and the premium on HML, the value factor is 0.4%.
All of these monthly numbers.
We can see that these premia are economically large
and they are also statistically significant.
We now consider an application of the three-factor Fama-French
model.
In their construction, they use stocks
from NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ from a period from 1963 to '91.
And they built 25 portfolios.
These portfolios are sorted on size and book-to-market ratios.

For each of these 25 portfolios, they're
on the regression of the excess portfolio return, that's
the portfolio return minus the risk-free rate,
on the three common factors, the market factor, the SMB,
small minus big portfolio factor,
and HML, the value factor.
After earning these regressions, we
can evaluate the loadings on the factors to see to what extent
various portfolios have different loadings
on the common factors, and the intercepts or the alphas.
If the APT model describes risk premia on these 25 portfolios
accurately, these alphas should be close to zero.
In the first table which would take
from the Fama-French paper, we see the distribution
of average returns across the 25 portfolios sorted
on size and book-to-market.
What we see is that as we go from low to high values
of the market cap, portfolio returns decline.
In other words, small stocks tend
to earn relatively higher returns
compared to the large stocks.
Value stocks, which are the companies
with the high book-to-market ratio,
tend to earn relatively high returns
compared to the growth stocks.
In other words, there is a significant degree
of heterogeneity in average returns across these 25
portfolios.
This is what the APT model, the three-factor model,
is going to try to explain.
We observed that there is a significant amount
of heterogeneity in the factor loadings across the 25
portfolios.
While the loadings on the market appear
to be relatively similar, the loadings
on the SMB and the HML factor are quite different.
This is not surprising.
The SMB factor is a long-short portfolio
of small versus large firms.
Small stocks tend to have a positive exposure
to this portfolio return, and large stocks
tend to have a negative exposure.
Similar logic applies to the HML portfolio and their exposures
along the dimensions of high versus
low market-to-book ratios.

The important numbers for us here
are the R-squared in the regression of portfolio
returns for these 25 size and book-to-market portfolios
on the common factors.
These R-squared numbers are quite high.
They are often in excess of 90%.
What this is telling us is that the three factors--
the market, SMB, and HML--
are doing a very good job at capturing return
variation of these 25 portfolios, which is something
we would expect in a three-factor APT world
because each of these 25 portfolios is well-diversified.
And therefore, their returns should be well explained
by the common factors.
In this final table, we'll look at the intercepts in the time
series regression of the returns on each of these 25 portfolios
on the three common factors--
the market, SMB and HML.
If you compare this to the analysis of the Chen, Roll,
and Ross model, this is a different technique.
Instead of regressing asset returns cross-sectionally
on the factor loadings, we are running a time series
regression where we're regressing each portfolio
return on the common factors.
Under the APT model, the intercept
of this regression or the alpha should be equal to zero.
Of course, in any statistical exercise,
we have estimation errors.
And so the intercept in this regression
is not going to be literally equal to zero.
But we can think about statistical tests of how
different these are from zero.
We can also think economically how
significant these deviations from zero may be.
What we find is that for most of the 25 portfolios,
the intercept, the alpha, is in fact quite close to zero.
Economically and statistically indistinguishable from zero.
There are a couple of exceptions that we observe, particularly
for small stock portfolios.
So what this is telling us is that by and large,
the cross-sectional differences in returns on the 25 portfolios
can be well described by a three-factor model.
There are some violations that we're
observing for small stocks.
So perhaps, a three-factor model is not a perfect description
of expected returns here.
Nonetheless, it does capture to a significant degree
the amount of cross-sectional variation in the returns
across these portfolios.
We have looked at a couple of examples
of how the APT framework can be applied
to determine expected excess returns on various assets.
We didn't go into the technical details of how exactly
regressions are set up an estimated.
What we wanted to illustrate is the concept.
That risk premier of various common factors
can be inferred from the history of returns on financial assets.
There are multiple techniques that could be used for that--
cross-sectional regressions, time series regressions.
One of the bottlenecks of the APT
is that the theory doesn't tell us
where the factors are coming from
or how many factors we need.
Making those choices requires some understanding
of the economics of the problem and
further statistical analysis.
At the end of the day, APT is a framework
which is rather flexible and can be used
in a variety of circumstances.
It enforces the notion that absence of arbitrage
imposes a strong restriction of how expected excess returns are
related to risk exposures.
This logic is quite robust, and it shows up
across a variety of asset pricing models.
In this way, the APT framework provides a general template
of how risk premia or expected returns can
be related to measures of risk.