
PROFESSOR: Next, we discuss estimation
of factor risk premia.
How can we learn about prices of risk
associated with the various systematic factors.
APT relation tells us that the risk premia
on various diversified portfolios
are based on their effect to exposures and their associated
prices of risk.
We can therefore use market returns,
market prices to recover the implied risk
premia which are attached to all of these systematic factors.
To see how this can be done, consider the following example.
Suppose we have two common factors.
As before, it's a shock to economic growth
and a shock to energy prices.
We start with the APT relation, that the risk premium
is a linear combination of factor loadings weighted
by prices of risk.
Now, suppose we observe two well-diversified portfolios,
A and B. The expected returns on these portfolios
are 12% and 10%, respectively.
And the risk-free interest rate is 2%.
The factor loadings for portfolio A
are 1 on the growth shock and 1.25 on the energy shock.
And for portfolio B, it's 2 on the growth shock and minus 0.5
the energy shock.
We want to use this data to recover
factor risk premia for the growth shock and the energy
shock.
The APT relation tells us that the expected excess return
on asset A, which is 12% minus 2%
is equal to its loading on the growth shock, which
is 1, times the price of risk of the shock, which is unknown,
that's lambda of the growth shock,
plus 1.25, which is the loading on the energy shock,
times the price of risk of that shock.
That gives us one equation that relates risk premia on the two
factors to the expected excess return of portfolio A.
We do the same for portfolio B and obtain a second relation.
We have a system of two equations
on the two unknown prices of risk that you can solve.
And we find the unique solution.
The risk premium associated with the energy shock is 4%.
And the risk premium on the growth shock is 5%.
To avoid arbitrage, all other portfolios
must have expected returns consistent with these factor
risk premia.
For example, if we have a third portfolio, portfolio C,
with a growth loading of one and the energy shock
loading of 0.5, then the risk premium on this portfolio
has to be equal to 1 times the premium on the growth shock,
plus 0.5 times the premium on the energy shock, or 7%.
What we see is that the risk premia associated
with the various risk factors can
be recovered from risk premia on well-diversified portfolios.