
PROFESSOR: We now extend the APT result to individual assets.
Let's recap.
So far, we established that absence
of arbitrage out of the assumption of factor models
implies that the risk premium on all well diversified
portfolios, have to be determined by their factor
loadings and the risk premium on individual factors.
What economists say about risk premium
on individual securities?
It turns out that the same relation
has to apply to almost all individual securities.
This result is what is called the arbitrage price and theory.
And it was developed by Stephen Ross in 1976.
To see the intuition for why APT relation must
hold for individual assets, at least
for most individual assets, suppose
that this relation is violated.
If APT relation is violated for many individual assets,
we should be able to find many securities for which expected
asset return is not equal to the sum of factor loadings
and factor risk premium.
There is going to be an extra term, which we call an alpha.
Alpha captures the degree of violation of the APT pricing
relation.
We also think of alpha as a measure of mispricing,
relative to the APT pricing formula.
Suppose that many assets have a non-zero alpha.
To be specific, let's say that many assets
have a positive alpha.
Our argument is going to be exactly analogous
if these alphas are negative.
Let's collect all of these securities
with positive alphas, and combine them into an equally
weighted portfolio.
Call this portfolio, p star.
The risk premium on this portfolio
is a weighted average of the risk
premium of individual assets.
As it is out, we see that the risk premium on this portfolio
is given by the average alpha across the securities,
plus the term that reflects the factor exposures,
or the portfolio P star.
In other words, we were able to construct a portfolio p
star for which the APT relation is violated.
The risk premium on this portfolio
is not equal to the sum across the factors of the factor
loading times the risk premium.
There is an extra term, the non-zero alpha.
What this means is that if the APT relation is violated
for a large number of individual assets,
it is going to be violated for some
of all diversified portfolios and that
as we concluded before would lead to arbitrage.
We therefore conclude that the APT formula, the relation
between expected returns and factor loadings,
must hold for almost all individual assets.
