
PROFESSOR: We next introduce an important concept,
a factor-mimicking portfolio.
So far, our common factors didn't
need to be traded assets.
They could be macroeconomic shocks.
They could also be returns on financial assets.
It turns out that we can replace any common shock
with a corresponding return on the financial portfolio.
This portfolio is called the factor-mimicking portfolio.
Let's see how it can be done.
Consider a case of a single-factor model.
We can visualize the APT relation graphically.
On the graph, on the horizontal axis,
we plot the factor exposure, b sub p.
On the vertical axis, we plot the expected returns
on the portfolios, r bar p.
The relation between expected portfolio returns
and the factor loading is linear.
For the portfolio with zero-factor loading,
the return is equal to the risk-free rate.
This is the point on the vertical axis.
And for the portfolios with positive factor loadings,
average returns are positive and increasing with the magnitude
of the factor risk exposure.
Consider one of these portfolios with a factor
loading equal to one.
Under the APT relation, the risk premium on this portfolio
has to be equal to the risk premium of the factor,
or lambda.
We can therefore see that the portfolio
with the factor loading equal to one or with the unit factor
beta can be used as a factor-mimicking portfolio.
The risk premium on this portfolio
is equal to the price of risk of the factor.
Moreover, because this portfolio is perfectly
correlated with the factor, we can use it
instead of the factor in the APT relation itself.
In other words, we can replace the factor
by its mimicking portfolio in our factor model.
Next, we generalize the argument of the case
of a multi-factor model.
We start with the model with the K factors.
And we consider K portfolios--
P1, P2, and so forth--
which are linearly independent.
Our objective is to construct mimicking portfolios
for each of the common factors.
Once we do that, the expected excess returns
on these portfolios are going to tell us the risk premia
for the associated factors.
To construct a mimicking portfolio for factor j,
we need to build a portfolio with the property
that its loading on factor j is equal to one.
And its loadings on all the other factors
are equal to zero.
This can be expressed algebraically
as a system of equations.
The factor loading of the portfolio
is equal to the weighted average of the factor
loadings of the individual assets or the portfolio
components.
In our case, these assets are portfolios P1, P2, through PK.
So consider the exposure to factor one.
We have the weight of the first portfolio multiplied
by its loading on the first factor,
plus the weight of the second portfolio multiplied
by its loading on the first factor, and so forth.
The equation tells us that the loading
of the portfolio on the first factor is equal to zero.
We do the same for each of the factors.
Factor j is special.
The loading on that factor is equal to one.
The loadings on all the other factors are zero.
We have a system of equations with K unknowns and K
equations.
We can find a unique solution.
This allows us to construct factor-mimicking portfolios.
To see how a procedure would work,
let's apply it to our previous example.
We have two portfolios, A and B. And two common factors,
a growth shock and an energy shock.
Portfolio A has a loading of 1 and 1.25
are the two factors, respectively.
Portfolio B has the loadings of 2 and minus 0.5.
We want to build a factor-mimicking portfolio
for the energy shock.
This portfolio has a weight of wA on portfolio A and wB
on portfolio B.
It must have zero exposure to the growth shock,
and the unit exposure to the energy shock.
These two conditions can be expressed as two equations.
For the growth shock we have the weight
on portfolio A multiplied by the beta of that portfolio, which
is one, plus the weight on portfolio B,
multiplied by the beta of that portfolio, which is two.
And the sum of these exposures has to be equal to zero.
For the energy shock, we have similar logic.
1.25, which is the loading of portfolio A multiplied
by the weight of A in the portfolio minus 0.5
times the weight of B is equal to one.
We solve the system equations to find
that the weight on portfolio A is 2/3, 0.67.
And the weight of portfolio B is minus 0.33.
Notice that these weights do not sum up to one,
and that is because in our construction
we are implicitly using a risk-free asset.
So as we add up the weights, the residual,
the difference between one and the sum of these weights
has to be invested in the risk-free asset.
In this particular example, we find a mimicking portfolio
for the energy factor which has weights of 2/3 on portfolio A
and minus 1/3 on portfolio B. And that
implies that the risk premium on the energy factor
is equal to 4%, which is exactly the same result that we
followed previously by computing the risk premia implied
by the expected returns on portfolios A and B.