
PROFESSOR: We now take a closer look
at the technical details of factor models.
Let's start with the single-factor model.
We have a large number of individual assets indexed by i.
One, two, three, and so forth.
Returns on these assets are denoted by ri tilde
to remind us that these are random.
And the expect returns are denoted by ri bar.
These returns are driven by a set
of common or systematic factors and by idiosyncratic shocks.
We denote systematic factors by capital F.
These are, for example, shocks to economic growth or shocks
to the value of the market portfolio and so forth.
Little f represents the news component of the common factor.
By definition, little f is equal to the factor value, F,
minus its expected value, F bar.
In other words, little f is the demeaned value of the factor.
Idiosyncratic shock of each asset, epsilon i, by definition
has zero mean.
The key assumption that we make for the factor model
is that idiosyncratic shocks are truly asset-specific,
which means that they are pairwise uncorrelated
across all the assets.
In other words, the covariance of epsilon i
and epsilon j for two different assets i and j
has to be equal to zero.
We now describe a return on any asset
as a sum of its expected value, ri bar,
plus the factor, F, times the loading on this factor,
which is asset-specific, that's b sub i, plus the idiosyncratic
shock, epsilon i.
Under this model, the variance of returns on assets i
consists of two terms.
The first term reflects the amount of systematic risk
to which this asset is exposed.
This component of the variance is
equal to the square of the factor
loading times the variance of the factor.
That's bi squared times sigma F squared.
The second term in the variance of the asset
is the idiosyncratic piece.
This reflects the variance of firm-specific shocks.
The covariance of returns between two assets, i and j,
is captured fully by their loadings on the common factor.
And this is because covariance of idiosyncratic components
of returns is zero.
So what we find is that the covariance of returns in assets
i and j is given by the variance of the factor,
sigma F squared, times the product of the two factor
loadings, b sub i and b sub j.
What we see is that under the factor structure,
factor exposures determine how much asset returns can
move with each other.
And that is because factors describe
fully the common sources of variation across the assets.
On top of that, idiosyncratic risk of each asset
contributes to its own return variance.
Now, we can generalize our construction
to the case of multiple factors.
This is indirect analogy to the single-factor case.
Again, each asset return is given by its expected value
plus the systematic component, which is now
a sum of contributions across multiple common factors
from one to k, and the idiosyncratic component,
epsilon i.
These common factors are going to affect multiple assets.
Each asset has its own loadings on all of these factors, which
we call factor betas or factor sensitivities or factor
loadings.
And we allow factors to be correlated with each other,
so we don't make any assumptions about their joint distribution.
As in the case of a single-factor model,
we maintain the assumption that idiosyncratic shocks are truly
asset-specific and their pairwise covariance
across the assets is zero.
On top of that, we maintain the assumption
that our factors are demeaned, so that the expected value
of each of these factors is zero.