
PROFESSOR: We now develop a result
that relates expected returns on well-diversified portfolios
to their systematic risk.
Let's start with an example, and use an arbitrage argument
to establish this kind of relation.
In our example, there are two portfolios, A and B.
And there is a single common source of risk,
that is a single common factor.
We assume that the expected excess return--
recall that excess returns are measured relative
to the risk-free rate.
The expected excess return on portfolio A is 5%.
And for portfolio B it is 8%.
The loading on the common factor is 1 for portfolio A
and 2 for portfolio B.
We want to argue that with this set of assumptions,
the market contains arbitrage.
Let's consider the following arbitrage strategy.
We're going to borrow $1 at the risk-free rate.
We are going to short $1 of portfolio
B and invest $2 into portfolio A.
By construction, this strategy doesn't require any capital.
We borrow $1, raise another dollar by shorting,
and invest the $2 in portfolio A.
Let's consider the payoff of this strategy next period.
The payoff from borrowing $1 is going to be minus 1
plus the risk-free rate.
The payoff from shorting portfolio B is minus 1
plus the risk-free rate, plus the risk premium on portfolio
B, plus the factor loading, which
is 2, times the realization of the factor, F.
This is multiplied by the scale of our investment, which is $1.
The payoff from our investment in portfolio A
is going to be 1 plus RF plus the 5% risk premium,
plus the factor loading, which is 1,
times the realization of the factor, F, multiplied by $2.
When we sum up all of these payoffs across the three
legs of our position, we find that the effect of the factor
disappears, that exposure cancels out,
and we're left with $0.02.
In other words, we started with no capital
and we constructed a portfolio with three positions in it,
which pays $0.02 next period with no risk.
This is arbitrage or free lunch.
The reason why we were able to find arbitrage
is that expected excess returns on our portfolios
and their factor loadings were not consistent with each other.
We will now generalize this result
and establish a relation between factor loadings
and expected returns, which is needed
in order to avoid arbitrage.
In particular, we want to show that expected excess returns
and factor loadings have to be linearly related.
For a single-factor model, this means
that for any portfolio, p, the expected excess return
has to be equal to its factor loading,
b sub p, times a constant, lambda.
This constant has to be common to all portfolios.
To see why this needs to be the case,
we're going to repeat the arbitrage
argument similar to the one that we just discussed
for our particular example.
Suppose that for another portfolio, portfolio q,
the risk premium is equal to its factor loading,
b sub q, times a different constant, lambda prime.
Lambda prime and lambda are not the same.
Assume also that b sub q, the loading on the factor,
is non-zero.
Now, we create a three-legged arbitrage.
We'll short $1 of portfolio p.
We buy bp over bq dollars of portfolio q.
And we borrow, bp over bq minus 1.
As you can see, this portfolio, this entire trade,
does not require any capital.
It is self-financing.
As we look at its payoff, we observe
that the payoff from the first investment, $1 in portfolio p,
plus the second investment, the investment in portfolio q,
plus the risk-free component, when
we sum them up, have the property
that there is no exposure to the factor remaining,
and the payoff is in fact a constant.
It's equal to lambda prime minus lambda times b sub p.
To avoid arbitrage, this constant
has to be equal to zero.
A zero-investment portfolio without risk cannot produce
non-zero payoffs.
We conclude that lambda prime and lambda
have to be the same to avoid arbitrage.
We have established an important result. That
in a frictionless market with a single-factor structure
of returns, in order to avoid arbitrage risk premium on all
well-diversified portfolios have to be given
by a product of the factor loading of the portfolio
and a common constant, lambda.
The factor loading represents the quantity
of risk in each portfolio.
It's a measure of systematic risk.
Lambda tells us how much compensation a portfolio
is going to earn per unit of systematic risk.
We call lambda the price of risk or the market price of risk
or the factor risk premium.
Our pricing result can be extended
to multi-factor models.
The result is very similar.
The risk premium on any well-diversified portfolio
is based on its factor exposures.
In particular, it is a sum across all
of the common factors, or the factor loading
times the corresponding factor premium or price of risk.
These factor exposures describe systematic risk
of the portfolio.
Now, in contrast to the single-factor case,
this is a vector.
A portfolio is characterized by a vector of its risk exposures.
We need to know how a portfolio loads on each of the factors
to fully describe its risk.
And each of these risk exposures carries its own risk premium.
Different factors don't earn the same compensation
for their risk exposures.
The intuition of this result is that we
could construct multiple portfolios with identical risk
exposures.
To avoid arbitrage, the expected returns have to be the same.
This means that expected return or the risk premium
on any diversified portfolio must
be determined by its exposure to the common factors.