
PROFESSOR: We now consider the key step
in the derivation of the APT--
diversification.
Consider a portfolio that includes multiple risk
assets, portfolio p.
This portfolio is described by its weights,
which we denote by w.
The return of the portfolio is a weighted average
of the returns on the individual assets.
Therefore, we can derive the moments of portfolio returns
from portfolio weights and the properties
of the individual assets returns.
In particular, the portfolio mean
is a weighted average of the average returns
across the assets in the portfolio.
The factor loadings of the portfolio
for each of the factors are also weighted
average of the individual factor loadings of the securities
in the portfolio.
And the idiosyncratic component of returns, epsilon p,
is a weighted average of individual epsilons.
It is this idiosyncratic piece that we
are interested in right now.
The variance of the idiosyncratic component
of portfolio return is the variance
of the sum of wi epsilon i, which
is the weighted average of individual epsilons.
Because idiosyncratic shocks are pairwise
uncorrelated across the assets, the variance of the sum
is equal to the sum of variances.
In other words, the variance of the idiosyncratic component
of portfolio return is a sum across all
of the assets of the individual idiosyncratic variances,
variance of epsilon i times the square of portfolio weight.
Now, let's specialize this result
to the case of an equally weighted portfolio.
Suppose that each of the portfolio weights, wi,
is equal to 1/N, where N is the number of assets
in the portfolio.
We're going to need a piece of notation.
We will denote the average idiosyncratic variance
across all of the assets by sigma i squared bar.
Now, as it is clear from the previous derivation,
the variance of the idiosyncratic component
of portfolio return is equal to 1/N times the average
idiosyncratic variance.
As we let the number of securities increase and N
rises, this number goes to 0.
In other words, as we enlarge the portfolio
by adding more and more assets equally weighted,
the non-systematic component of variance vanishes in the limit.
This result does not depend on the portfolio
being exactly equally weighted.
The same argument can be applied to any well-diversified
portfolio, as long as the maximum portfolio
weight decreases as the number of assets in the portfolio
rises.
In other words, all that we require
is that the portfolio weights are more or less evenly
distributed across the assets, but they don't need
to be exactly equally weighted.
What we determined is that in a well-diversified
portfolio for a specific or idiosyncratic risk
can be eliminated as the number of assets in the portfolio
increases.
This is an important property of well-diversified portfolios.
They don't have idiosyncratic risk, at least
in the limit of a large number of assets.
The only risk that affects well-diversified portfolios
is the factor risk or systematic risk.
This is the kind of risk that cannot be diversified away
by forming portfolios with a large number of assets.
To illustrate, consider the following empirical example.
We construct two portfolios by sorting stocks on their market
capitalization, or market size.
We start in 1926.
Portfolio 1 includes the largest stocks in the US stock market.
This portfolio is based roughly on the top 30% in terms
of market capitalization judging by the distribution of market
cap on the New York Stock Exchange.
In recent years, this portfolio included approximately 500
stocks.
The second portfolio includes the lower tier
in terms of market size.
This portfolio, we can call it mid cap,
includes roughly 1,000 stocks.
These two portfolios are well-diversified.
And by construction, they do not overlap.
A stock can be either in Portfolio 1
or Portfolio 2 or neither.
They have no securities in common.
If return distribution in the stock market
can be described by a single factor model, then
both of these portfolios, being well-diversified,
will have exposure to the common factor
and no idiosyncratic risk.
In other words, these two portfolios
should be perfectly correlated with each other.
The exposures to the common factor
may not be the same in magnitude,
but the returns should be perfectly correlated.
As we look at the scatter plot of the return distribution
of the mid cap portfolio on the vertical axis
relative to the large cap portfolio
on the horizontal axis, we observe
that, indeed, the returns on these two portfolios
are highly correlated with each other.
They're not perfectly correlated as a single factor
model will predict, but the correlation is very high.
And the R squared of a regression
of the mid cap return on the large cap return is over 90%.
Observe that the slope of the line that
captures the linear relation between these two portfolios
is higher than 1.
What this means is that the mid cap portfolio
has a higher loading on the common factor
than the large cap portfolio.
These results suggest that there is a significant common factor
that affects returns on large cap and mid cap stocks.
And even though these two portfolios
have no securities in common, their returns with each other
are highly correlated.
We also see that the correlation is not perfect.
And that suggests that perhaps there are other factors at play
here and a single factor model does not fully
describe the return distribution of these two portfolios.