
PROFESSOR: We will now discuss the empirical implementation
of APT and consider a couple of important examples.
As we implement APT empirically, we need to take three steps.
First, we need to choose or identify the common factors.
Common factors are the economic variables, or the mimicking
portfolios that we think affect a broad cross-section of asset
returns.
At that point, we need to make a choice.
How many factors to use and which factors are important.
There is no clear recipe for this choice.
There are several techniques that could be used.
You could use prior information about common economic shocks,
macro-factors that may be relevant.
You could use statistical techniques
to help us choose which common factors are
important for describing the cross-section of returns
and how many of them to use.
The choice of the number and the nature of factors
is outside of the APT framework itself.
So we need to use other considerations
to choose the factors.
The second step is estimation of factor loadings.
We need to use statistical techniques
to figure out how various assets load on the common factors.
Typically, this is done by running
a time-series regression of portfolio returns
on the factors.
The third step is to estimate risk premia.
We do this usually by regressing returns
on various assets on the factor loadings.
This kind of cross-sectional regression
reveals the compensation for exposure
to each individual factor.
At the end, we end up with an assessment of which factors
are important for describing the cross-section of returns
and how much compensation is earned by various risk factors.
As the first example of the implementation of APT,
consider a macro-factor model.
This was the model developed by Chen, Roll, and Ross
in the 1986 article.
In this model, they have several common factors.
In addition to the market factor,
they consider a number of macroeconomic factors
such as shocks in industrial production,
changes in expected and unexpected inflation,
as well as changes in the risk premium, which they
proxy by the difference in returns between bonds rated
Baa and lower and long-term government
bonds and unexpected changes in the term premium which
are the differences in returns between long-term government
bonds and T-bills.
The data sample covers the period from 1953 to 1984.
The next step in the analysis is to estimate betas
on the asset of diversifiable portfolios.
The portfolios they choose are equity portfolios
sorted on the market capitalization of the stocks.
They construct 20 portfolios, starting
from the 5% of the smallest firms
and going all the way up to the 5% of the largest firms.
They run a time series regression
of returns on each of these portfolios
on the corresponding factors.
In this regression, they use five years of monthly data
to estimate the current value of de facto loadings for each
of these portfolios.
As a result of this analysis, they
obtain estimates of factor betas for each of the factors,
for each of the portfolios in the data set each month.
Next, the paper estimates factor risk premia.
We have 20 diversified portfolios based
on the market cap of the firms.
For each of these portfolios we have
estimates of the factor loadings for each of the factors.
So each month we run the cross-sectional regression
of portfolio returns on the corresponding factor loadings.

The slope, coefficients in this regression, the lambdas
estimate the factor risk premia.
After running this regression each month,
we average the results across time
to find an estimate of the average risk premium associated
with each of the factors.
The result of this analysis is that all
of the economic factors used in the model appear to be priced.
There is a compensation attached to exposures
to all of these factors.
We also see that various factors have different prices of risk.
And in fact, they are different inside.
Some of them are positive.
Others are negative.
The APT model itself does not tell us how and why these risk
premia are determined.
Why is it that one of the factors
has a large positive risk premium?
And the other has a negative risk premium?
To understand where these risk premia are coming from,
we need to think about the economics of risk exposures
and how they're compensated in the market.
Again, the APT as a pricing model
is not concerned with the sources of risk premia.
It simply tells us that expected excess returns
on various portfolios of various assets
have to be consistent with each other.
They have to be consistent with the factor risk premia.
Where these premia are coming from is outside of the model.
Having said that, we can make some sense of the magnitude,
and in particular the sign of the risk premia
associated with different factors.
For example, if we look at the Industrial production, that's
the MP factor in the model, we see
that the risk premium for this factor is positive.
What this means is that the securities that
tend to fall in value at a time when there
is a negative shock to industrial production
tend to earn relatively higher returns.
This is fairly intuitive.
The times when industrial production declines
are usually the times of economic downturns.
And assets that lose value precisely
at the same time when the entire economy is not doing well
are less desirable.
They have to earn a relatively high average rate of return
to compensate their investors for holding that kind of risk.
We can think in a similar way about exposures
to other kinds of risk factors and why
they're compensated positively or negatively with their risk
premia.
We observe another important result here
that the market factor, the first factor
in the table, that's the value weighted portfolio of stocks,
doesn't seem to be priced after we control
for the other economic factors.
What this means is that whatever economic shocks are driving
the market portfolio, it seems to be
captured by the other factors in the model.
And after controlling for the exposure to the other factors,
exposure to the market is not compensated
with an additional risk premium.