
PROFESSOR: In this lecture, we develop the arbitrage pricing
theory, or APT.
APT is an important theoretical model,
which relates expected returns on various risky assets
to their systematic risk.
In particular, APT tells us how exactly
to quantify or measure systematic risk
of various assets.
The main idea of the APT is to start with the factor
model of returns.
Stock returns have common factors, or systematic factors
that affect the variety of assets,
and the non-systematic or firm-specific idiosyncratic
factors that affect individual assets or individual stocks.
Diversification can be used to eliminate non-systematic risk,
which means that diversified portfolios are only
exposed to the common sources of risk, or factor risk.
This implies that risk premia or expected excess returns
on diversified portfolios depend on their exposure
to systematic risk factors.
This is the main result we are going to establish.

Because portfolios consist of individual assets performing
a variety of diversified portfolios,
we can show that for almost all risky assets,
expected returns also depend on their exposure
to systematic factors.
And that is the main result of APT,
that expected excess returns or risk premia on various assets
are determined by their exposures
to systematic sources of risk, or the common return factors.
Let's start by developing a factor model.
Under the factor model, stock returns
are exposed to two kinds of shocks, two kinds of risk--
common shocks or common factors, and
asset-specific or firm-specific shocks.
Let's think about common factors.
These factors proxy for shocks to economic conditions
which affect the variety of firms
and which are important to investors.
Such shock could include shocks to economic growth,
shocks to monetary policy or interest rates,
shocks to oil price, government policy shocks, and so forth.
These are common macroeconomic shocks
that affect various firms.
Not necessarily in the same way, but they
are broadly important in the economy.
As an example, consider an asset the price of which
rises when inflation unexpectedly accelerates.
This kind of asset can be used to hedge inflation risk.
An investor who buys this asset is
going to gain some protection against inflation.
As a result, we would expect that assets like these
are going to earn relatively low-risk premia because they're
going to be in high demand by investors.
The bottom line is that factors represent systematic or common
sources of risk which cannot be diversified away by forming
portfolios.
Firm-specific events give rise to
idiosyncratic or firm-specific risks.
These include events like new product innovations,
lawsuits, changes in management, labor strikes, and so forth.
As an example, consider a two-factor model.
In this model, the two factors are
represented by shocks to economic growth
and to energy prices.
In particular, the shock to growth
is the unanticipated change in economic growth.
So it's expected value is zero.
And the same is true of the shock to energy prices.
Under this model, the return on any asset
is represented by its average value, Ri bar,
plus the sum of two systematic terms, which
are the shock to the economic growth times the loading
on that shock, b, plus the shock to energy prices,
times the loading on that shock, plus the idiosyncratic piece,
of epsilon i, which represents firm-specific idiosyncratic
shocks.
Consider further two hypothetical firms.
The first of these is the solar panel installer.
This company has moderate exposure
to the overall economic growth, so its loading
on the growth shock is going to be positive but perhaps
not very large.
This company also benefits from an increase in energy costs.
So its loading on energy prices is
likely to be positive and perhaps large.
The second company is a long-distance trucking firm.
This company is very cyclical.
Its cash flows are highly sensitive to economic activity.
And as a result, its loading on the economic growth shocks
is positive and large.
This company is also negatively exposed to energy costs.
Rising energy costs imply higher operational costs
for this firm.
And so its loading on the energy shock
is negative and large in absolute value.