
PROFESSOR: The most common use of the Greeks
is in dynamic hedging strategies involving Delta, or delta gamma
hedging.
In this last part of this week's class,
we'll look at delta hedging in detail
in the context of products that offer protection
against downside risk arising from the stock market.
Those products were created because investors
have a taste for securities where their principal is
protected, but they still share in some of the upside
if the market turns out to do well.
Many investment banks offer such securities.
They hedge this short position that
creates for them in stocks using a combination
of purchased options and dynamic trading strategies.
Examples of these type of products
are shown in the MITTS and SUN offering documents
that are available to you on the class materials page.
Similar products continue to be offered today.
The example we will first study in detail
is for a Capital Protected Note, which is loosely
based on a security that was issued
in 2008 by Morgan Stanley.
In this example, we'll be focusing
on the perspective of the protection seller, which
you can imagine is an investment bank that you're working at.
Say it's February 22, 2008, and you're selling
Capital Protected Notes.
The note matures on February 20, 2015,
and so it has a seven year life.
The issue price per share is $10,
as is the principal value per share.
The note pays no interest.
However, it provides 100% principle protection.
Investors are guaranteed to get at least the amount
they paid for each share.
In addition, the payoff at maturity
includes what's called a supplemental redemption
amount, or SRA. That's calculated as 116%
of the share principal multiplied
by the return of the normalized S&P 500
over the life of the security if that return is positive.
As the issuer of this security, you want to lock in the gain
from selling the security, which means
hedging against the risk of the short position you've
created for yourself in the S&P 500 index.
We'll look at how you can do this with a dynamic delta
hedging strategy, which means setting up
a replicating portfolio and rebalancing it over time
as market conditions change.
Next week we'll extend this analysis
to the alternative of delta gamma hedging, which
creates a more robust hedge.
This graph shows the payoff at the end
of seven years on a share of a Capital Protected Note
as a function of the normalized S&P 500 index at that time.
The shape of the payoff reflects the floor value
equal to the principal of $10, and then
the potential for appreciation as the value of the S&P 500
index goes up, multiplied by a factor of 116%.
To find the value of the Capital Protected Note,
we decompose the payoff into two components.
The first is a zero coupon bond with the principal,
or equivalently, face value of $10, and maturity of cap T
equals seven years.
Second, 1.16 at the money call options on a normalized S&P
500, with maturity T equals 7 years.

The reference index is normalized,
so that S0 is initially at $10.
To do that, we need to find beta,
such that beta times the S&P 500 index value
is initially equal to $10.
On the issue date, the actual value of the S&P 500
was 1,353.1.
That implies that we can solve for beta
by dividing 10 by 1353.1.
All future values of the index used in the calculations
are also multiplied by this normalization factor.
We also have other data on the issuance date.
The interest rate, r, is equal to 3.23% on a continuously
compounded basis.
The dividend yield on the S&P 500 is taken to be 2%.
The bank's forecasts of market volatility over the seven years
is set to sigma of 15% on an annual basis.
Notice, if you go back to the previous slide,
that our payoff diagram could have been constructed
from the two positions we're just talking about,
a zero coupon bond with a face value of $10
plus the call options, which have
a payoff that looks like that.
And as usual, we can sum the two positions together
to get our total payoff, which was what was
drawn on the original diagram.
Turning back to our calculation of value, with this information
you can estimate the value of the security using
Black-Scholes-Merton for a dividend paying stock
for the call option component, and adding it
to the present value of the zero coupon bond.
We have, then, the present value of the zero coupon
bond, and 1.16 call options, where the current price is $10,
the strike price is $10, and we know our other parameters.
We can solve all of this to find that the present value
of the bond is 7.9764, the value of each call option is $1.70,
and we have 1.16 call options in our position.
So the total value of the position is $9.94.
Well, that conclusion suggests that the value of the Capital
Protected Note is a little less than the $10
that investors pay for the security.
Effectively, investors are giving up
the interest they would have earned on the $10 principal
in exchange for a call option.
The bank makes $0.05 per share that they issue.
Well, $0.05 is a pretty thin margin,
and the short position is a very risky one,
so the bank wants to hedge that risk to lock
in the $0.05 per share profit.
And we'll now turn to how they can do that.
Since issuing the capital protected note
involves short positions in a bond
and in call options on the S&P 500,
hedging that exposure requires taking
off setting long positions.
That implies first buying a zero coupon bond
for 7.9764 and with a face value of $10
to hedge the bond component.
Second, to hedge the option component,
buy 1.16 units of the replicating portfolio
for the embedded call option in the Capital Protected Note.
Here's the procedure for setting up that replicating portfolio
for the call.
We first calculate the delta, which we know is n of d1,
and we get a delta of 0.5747.
We also know that we can find the bond position
as being equal to the call minus delta times the current stock
price.
That gives us a position in the bond of minus 4.047.
Taking those two positions together,
we invest 5.747 in the S&P 500 and borrow 4.047.
We conclude that the net value of the replicating portfolio
is the 5.747 minus the 4.047, so it's
equal to 1.7, which, by construction, is
the same as the value of the call option.
The final step is to multiply both the stock and bond
positions in the replicating portfolio
by 1.16 to scale up the replicating portfolio
to match the exposure in the Capital Protected Note.
To ensure that this hedge continues
to be effective over the next seven years,
the bank needs to frequently rebalance
the replicating portfolio as the underlying delta changes.
Remember that the call option delta
will change with the S&P 500 index value,
with the passage of time, and with any changes in r
and sigma.
You could evaluate the size of those different sensitivities
by calculating the theta, rho, and vega for your exposure.
Notice that the interest rate risk
on the portion of the obligation that's the return of principal
has been fully hedged by investing in a zero coupon
bond whose payoff matches that part of the liability,
and no further adjustments are ever necessary.
With regard to the S&P 500 index, if its value increases,
then the call option delta increases, and conversely,
if it decreases.
As the S&P 500 and any other parameters change,
you can recalculate delta for the replicating portfolio.
The replicating portfolio is then
rebalanced by adjusting the holdings of stocks and bonds
to match the updated option value in delta.
Each time the portfolio is rebalanced,
there may be a gain or loss to the bank.
But if the hedging strategy is effective,
the sum of those gains and losses
will be offset by the gains or losses on the Capital Protected
Note.
An important question to ask is: why do a complicated dynamic
replication here, instead of initially just buying
call options on the S&P 500?
The answer is that call options on the S&P 500
are actively traded for shorter maturities,
but there is unlikely to be adequate liquidity at longer
maturities like seven years.
When liquid options aren't available in the market,
it can be cheaper, particularly for a large bank,
to hedge using a dynamic delta hedging strategy.
In fact, you can think of the $0.05
that the bank earns as compensation
for doing this delta hedging on behalf of investors,
who wouldn't be able to do it as inexpensively on their own.