
PROFESSOR: Risk managers and options traders
need to know the sensitivity of the value of their option
holdings to various factors in order to understand their risk
exposure and how to hedge it.
Those sensitivities of option prices are known as the Greeks.
Will discuss, first, Delta, the first order sensitivity
to the underlying asset's price; second, Gamma,
the second order sensitivity to the underlying asset's price;
third, Theta, the sensitivity to the passage of time;
fourth, Rho, the sensitivity to interest rates; and fifth,
Vega, the sensitivity to the underlying's volatility.
For options that can be priced using Black-Scholes-Merton,
the Greeks often can be explicitly calculated
by taking derivatives of those pricing formulas.
However, the concepts are very general,
and they're frequently applied to all sorts of derivatives
that can't be priced with Black-Scholes-Merton.
Delta and Gamma are the first and second order sensitivities
of an option's value to changes in the price of the underlying
asset.
The general idea for the Delta is
expressed by taking the derivative of the option price
with respect to the value of the underlying.
As it's represented here, the underlying
is a stock with price, S, if it's a European put or call
option that one can differentiate
the Black-Scholes-Merton formula,
with respect to the stock price, and prove that the Delta is
N of d1 for a call, and it's minus N of minus d1 for a put.
The Gamma of an option is found by taking the second derivative
of its value with respect to the underlying asset price.
That's equivalent to taking the first derivative of the Delta.

Again, if it's a stock option that
satisfies the Black-Scholes-Merton
assumptions, you can drive a closed form solution.
The result will be identical for either a call or put option,
and that's given here.

Some of those calculations are actually
trickier than it may first appear,
because d1 and d2 also depend on s.
You can give it a try, or see the calculations
in Hull's textbook, or from other sources
if you're curious.
However, for the homework and exam,
you only need to know how to use the formulas shown
in the slides and how to interpret them.
You won't be asked to do any derivations.
Let's return to the graph we looked at earlier,
where we plotted the current value of a put option
as a function of the underlying stock price.
We assume that the current stock price is 100
and that the option is currently at-the-money.
As before, we can interpret Delta
as the slope of the tangent line at the current stock price.
Notice that, for a put option, that tangent line
has a negative slope everywhere, which
means that the Delta of a put option is always negative.
The Gamma reflects the convexity of this function,
in other words, how much curvature there is.
The higher the Gamma the more curvature.

Well, now, how about a call option?
We can do a similar graphical analysis.

The value curve for a call option will look like this.

Again, assuming the stock price is currently 100.
We can find the slope of the tangent line
at the current stock price.
And that slope represents the Delta of the call option.
You can see that the slope of the value function
is positive everywhere, which means the Delta is positive
everywhere.
And for the Gamma, again, it represents
the degree of curvature.
The higher the Gamma, the more convexity,
or the more curvature.
This graph shows what happens to the Delta of a caller put
option on the stock as a function of the current value
of the underlying stock and holding all else equal.
As we just established, both algebraically and graphically,
the Delta of the put is always negative.
It's most steeply negative for low stock prices,
and goes to 0 for high stock prices.

We can see that by looking back at the previous graph,
where four low stock prices, say, here, the tangent
line is steep.
And for high stock price, say here, the tangent line
is basically flat.
The slope is close to 0.
For a call option, the slope is 0 when the option is very far
out-of-the-money, which is when stock prices are low.
And it increases to 1 when the option is deep into-the-money.
This is a good place to emphasize
that it's this large variation in Deltas with stock prices
that causes the replicating portfolios for options
to change over time, sometimes quite quickly, when
stock prices make a big move.
Those changes can necessitate frequent portfolio rebalancing
and dynamic hedging strategies.

We saw that the Gamma is the same for a put or call option.
Plotting it is a function of the current stock price.
It's close to 0 for very high or very low
values of the underlying stock, relative to the strike price,
and peaks near the strike price of the option.
This pattern of curvature is also
apparent from looking back at the graph on slide 27.
We see here that around the strike price,
the function is quite curved.
But it's fairly straight for high or low values
of the stock.
