
PROFESSOR: How good is the protection provided
by a delta hedging strategy?
Well, the answer will depend on a number of factors that
include the frequency of rebalancing,
the stability of the parameters, and, particularly,
the accuracy of the volatility estimate,
and whether or not there's large jumps in stock prices.
Theoretically, rebalancing would occur
continuously but that would be prohibitively
expensive to execute and, in practice,
there's always a trade off between how often the hedge is
adjusted and the cost of making those adjustments.
A practical answer, though, to the question,
is that such strategies work well enough
to make it profitable for many financial institutions
to offer products like capital protected notes
to their clients.
For an example of where dynamic delta hedging worked well
in practice, here we're looking at the year 2000
and comparing the value of a replicating portfolio
for a put option on the S&P 500 with the Black-Scholes-Merton
price for the same put option.
The top panel shows the evolution
of stock prices over that year, which fluctuated considerably,
and towards the end of the year, were mostly falling.
The middle panel shows how the corresponding delta
for the put option changed.
As we know, the delta is always negative
and as the stock price falls, the put
moves further into the money, which
increases the size of the short position on the stock index.
The bottom panel plots the Black-Scholes-Merton price
for the put option and also the value
of the replicating portfolio.
As we'd expect, those values rise as stock prices
fall and vice versa.
The fact, though, that the two lines track each other
so closely means that the replicating portfolio strategy
is providing an effective hedge, even though rebalancing is not
occurring continuously.
To see why delta hedging doesn't always work,
we'll look at portfolio insurance and its track record
during the time of the 1987 stock market crash.
Portfolio insurance has some similarities
to the capital protected notes we've just been discussing.
Creating portfolio insurance by using dynamic trading
strategies is an idea created and marketed
by Berkeley professors, Hayne Leland and Mark Rubinstein
and their friend, John O'Brien.
Their work created a still popular but sometimes
controversial way to achieve protection against losses
in the stock market, while still retaining some of the upside.
The strategy became very controversial,
because it was initially blamed for causing, or at least making
worse, the 1987 stock market crash.
However, investigations into that allegation
concluded that these strategies were probably not to blame.
Various forms of portfolio insurance
were developed around that time.
And they could be implemented in a variety of ways.
One was with the sale of out-of-the-money put options
that limited investor losses on the market.
The willingness by investors, using the strategy
to take some losses, is like taking
a deductible and an insurance policy that
lowers its premium cost.
The most significant development in this period
was that of perpetual insurance, which appealed to long horizon
investors like pension funds that
got only limited value out of protection that
just lasts a few years.
Perpetual insurance is like having a renewable American put
option that never expires.
That insurance allows the investor or the insured
to exercise its option at any time in the future.
Portfolio insurance seemed to be working very well,
but then came the October 1987 stock market crash.
To see how and why portfolio insurance failed
during the 1987 market crash, we'll
again compare the value of a put option on the S&P 500
with a replicating portfolio for that same option
over the same period.
The top panel shows the evolution of stock prices,
now for the year 1987.
The market was generally rising until the crash on October 19,
when it fell precipitously by 23% in one day,
and remained at that lower level for most
of the rest of the year.
The middle panel shows that with the rising market earlier
in the year, the Delta of a put option that's originally
at the money rises toward 0 over time,
as the put option goes further and further out-of-the-money.
With the market crash, there's a huge downward jump in Delta,
meaning that a substantial short position is required
in the replicating portfolio.
Turning to the bottom panel, it's
comparing the evolution of the Black-Scholes-Merton put value
with that of the replicating portfolio over time.
You can see that the two track well earlier in the year
when stock prices moved smoothly over time.
But at the time of the crash, the two values diverged.
The replicating portfolio value fell relative
to the Black-Scholes-Merton put value.
You can think of what happened in terms of the short position
in the replicating portfolio becoming
too small at the time of the crash, and hence,
benefiting too little from the drop in stock prices.
That drop in the value of the replicating portfolio
meant that portfolio insurance strategies
failed to protect investors against losses
in the face of the crash in stock prices
exactly the time when the insurance was most needed.
This real world episode illustrates
in practice what we learned in theory,
delta hedging strategies only work
well when stock price movements are pretty smooth
and when there's no large jumps.
When there are large jumps in stock prices,
it's impossible to rebalance fast enough
to eliminate all the risk.
Next week, we'll start by seeing how to modify the hedging
strategy by incorporating Delta Gamma hedging, which
leads to a more robust hedge.
We'll also look more closely at modeling volatility
and at some of the other popular options pricing models.
See you then.