
PROFESSOR: To see the relationship
between the binomial model and the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
it's necessary to understand the probability distribution
of stock prices at the terminal time, cap T, implied
by the binomial model.
Clearly, for some of the nodes there
are many different paths through the tree that land there.
And for others, there are few, or even just one way,
to get there.
There are n + 1 nodes at maturity
on an n-step tree, indexed by j equals 0 through n.
The top node can be reached only along the path
where there are n ups, and no downs.
So if n were equal to 3, we would have n up, up, up
and that would be the only way to keep
on going up in the tree.

The next node down can be reached in several ways.
It can be reached with any path with two ups and one down.
So we could go down, up, up, or we could go up, down, up,
or we could go up, up, down, and get to this node.
Continuing in this way, the bottom node
can only be reached, again, in one way, with three downs:
down, down, down.

The mathematical formula that summarizes that information
on the risk-neutral probability of reaching each node j,
at time cap T, is given by the formula that we have here.

The inputs are the risk-neutral probability of an up,
q* and the number of nodes on the tree.
The exclamation points stand for factorials,
which are the product of a sequence of increasing
integers.
For example, 3 factorial is 1 times 2 times 3.
By convention, 0 factorial equals 1.
Some of you may recognize this formula
as arising directly from the binomial theorem.

The trees down here has the complete set of stock price
outcomes and the associated probabilities at the final time
on a three-step tree.
It also shows the formulas, in this case,
that generate the probabilities at the top two nodes.
As a number of steps gets large, one
can prove that the distribution of stock price outcomes
converges to a log-normal distribution.
This graph plots the probability distribution
for the stock price on a tree with 250 steps,
T equals 1, and an initial stock price of 100.
The possible stock price outcomes are on the x-axis,
and the probabilities of those different outcomes
are on the y-axis.

If we take the log of each of those 250 price observations
and plot the outcomes against the probability of each,
we get the figure shown here.
It's possible to prove mathematically
that in the limit as n goes to infinity,
this is the normal density function,
with mean and standard deviations at time cap T,
given by these equations.
We have the mean, and we have the standard deviation.
You can see that the results from the binomial tree
are indistinguishable, with 250 steps, from those calculated
using the formula for the normal density directly.

What we can conclude from this graphical analysis
is that the probability distribution
of the log of the stock price at time cap T,
implied by the binomial tree, is the same
as the normal distribution.
We also know that we can price a call option in the usual
risk-neutral way, which is actually equivalent to finding
the risk-neutral probability of each terminal node --
which we'll call capital Q* --
using that probability weight for the payoff on that node,
and discounting it back to time 0 at the risk-free rate.

I want to turn back to the fact that, in the limit,
S sub T is log-normally distributed.
We'll call f of S sub T the log-normal distribution of T,
with mean mu of T, and standard deviation, sigma of T.
In the limit, the formula for the value of the call option,
based on the summation in the first equation here,
converges to the integral we've written down here.

It turns out that the bottom integral is mathematically
equivalent to the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
for pricing a European call option.
Therefore, we've informally shown that the binomial tree
model converges to the Black-Scholes-Merton model
as the number of steps on the tree goes to infinity.
