PROFESSOR: Theta is a sensitivity of an option's
value to the passage of time.
It's estimated by taking the derivative of an options price
with respect to the current time, little t.

Note that as the current time increases,
the remaining time to expiration decreases.
Thus, Theta is telling us about what happens to option value
as its remaining maturity gets smaller.
The expression for Theta that comes out
of the Black-Scholes-Merton model
is a long and ugly formula, and I won't ask you to use it.
But I do want you to understand the forces that
influence its value.
In fact, the sign of Theta can be either positive or negative,
depending on where the current stock price is, relative
to the strike price, and also depending on other parameters.
To understand why the sign can go either way,
consider the current value of a put option
as a function of the current stock price,
and also the payoff on that same option at its expiration.
The current value of the put is in blue, as usual.
And now, the payoff is this dotted line.

We know by no arbitrage that, as the expiration date approaches,
the current value of the option has
to approach its final payoff.
Because the characteristic shape of the current value
of a European put option typically
lies below the final payoff for low values of the stock price,
and it lies above the final payoff for high values
of the stock price, we have a positive Theta for low stock
prices and we have a negative Theta for high stock prices.

This slide, again, explains the idea
of the Theta of a European put option
is positive for low stock prices and negative for high stock
prices.
The basic story is what I just explained.
In thinking about Theta in general,
you should keep in mind that, for both puts and calls,
a shorter time to expiration tends
to reduce option value because it shortens the time over which
the option provides insurance value
or that it has positive upside.
This is related to the fact that an option typically
has positive time value.
However, that's not always the case.
A simple example demonstrates that the opposite
can be true for a put option.
That is, that it can become more valuable when there's
a shorter time to expiration, and thus have a positive Theta.
Say the stock value has gone to 0 because the firm has
gone bankrupt.
Then, the payoff will just be the strike price
and the value of that payoff today is its present value.
The present value will be higher, the sooner
the payoff can be realized.
For European call options, there's two distinct cases
to consider.
When the stock won't pay a dividend
prior to its expiration, Theta is unambiguously negative.
That's because, when the stock price is very high relative
to the strike price, the option is very likely to be exercised.
The dominant effect is it's better
to postpone paying the strike price,
because, effectively, you have a zero interest rate
loan in the amount of the strike price.
When the stock price is low, the option
provides downside protection for longer, if it
has a longer time to maturity.
And again, there's the benefit of postponing
any future payment.
The second case is for a dividend paying stock.
As we talked about in the last class,
because the dividend causes the stock price to drop,
it can be optimal to early exercise a call option
to capture that dividend.
Since that isn't possible with European options,
the option may be worth more on a dividend paying stock
when it has a shorter maturity.
The intuition for the sign of Theta for European call
options in each of those two cases
is illustrated here, graphically.
Again, comparing the current value of the option
as a function of the current stock price with its payoff
value at expiration.
The top graph shows that the value
of a call option on a non-dividend paying stock
always lies above the payoff and so converges to the payoff
from above over time.
The option is worth more alive than dead.
That implies a negative Theta.
For a dividend paying stock, which
is shown in the bottom graph, there
are two offsetting forces.
That is, the time value of the option
pulls in the opposite direction from the effect of the dividend
payment.
For low stock prices, the dividend effect
can dominate, resulting in a negative Theta.
Although the Black-Scholes-Merton model
assumes a constant interest rate and a constant stock price
volatility, we know, in fact, that interest rates
and volatilities vary over time.
It's useful, then, to know how much an option value will
be affected, in case one wants to hedge those sources of risk.
We'll first consider the effect of interest rate changes.
Rho answers the question, what's the derivative of the option
price, with respect to a small change in the interest
rate, holding everything else constant?
For European puts and calls, it can
be valued using the Black-Scholes-Merton model.
That implies the simple formulas for Rho that are shown here.

The sign of Rho for a call option is always positive.
That's because, when interest rates are higher,
the value of waiting to pay the strike price, K,
is also higher.
The opposite is true for a put option.
And its Rho is always negative.
Having to wait to receive the strike price
becomes more costly with a higher interest rate.
The formulas for Rho show that it increases at absolute value
with the expiration date, cap T. That makes sense,
because the longer the time to expiration,
the larger is the effect of interest rates on value.
It also increases with K for the same reason.
Finally, Rho is affected by N of d2 and N of minus d2.

The weights of N of d2 an N of minus d2
can always be interpreted as the probability
that the option will expire in the money, which, of course, is
when the timing of the strike price payment
will be relevant to value.
Our final Greek is Vega.
Vega measures the sensitivity of option value to volatility.
As usual, we differentiate the option value with respect
to the variable of interest, in this case, Sigma.

Vega turns out to be always positive.
And in the case of the Black-Scholes-Merton version,
it's equal to this expression.
Both put and call options provide more protection
and more potential upside when volatility increases.
And that increases their value.
As this graph shows, Vega is highest for an at the money
option, where the curvature of the payoff
and the current value of the option is highest.
A curiosity about Vega that you might have already noticed
is that it's not actually a Greek letter.
But for the purposes of options pricing,
it's become an honorary Greek.
