
PROFESSOR: A rigorous derivation of the basic Black-Scholes
model relies on the assumptions listed here.
First, financial markets are frictionless.
That means no taxes on trading or transactions costs,
that assets are perfectly divisible,
and there are no restrictions on short sales.
Second, interest rates for risk-free borrowing and lending
are equal and constant.

Third, the stock pays no dividends
over the life of the option.
Note that this assumption is quite easily relaxed.
And fourth, stock prices conform to the log-normal model.
That model assumes that stock prices follow
a continuous path, importantly with no jumps,
and that the mean and variance of the log return are constant.
Furthermore, the log return over any period of time
is independent of the log return over any other period of time
and that log return is normally distributed.
Knowing these assumptions is important not just
to understand the theory.
It's important for the practical reason
that when the assumptions don't hold, such as when
short selling the asset or borrowing
is expensive or impossible, using the formula
to evaluate options prices may lead you
to an inaccurate conclusion about the value.
In such cases, the model has to be modified
or a different model has to be used.

In their original analyses, Black and Scholes and,
separately, Merton showed that under these assumptions,
the return on the stock option could
be replicated with a portfolio consisting of precisely chosen
quantities of the underlying stock and a risk-free bond.
To find the call option price, they
used the same sort of argument that we went through
in the binomial case.
Namely that if two portfolios have exactly the same payoffs
in every future state of the world,
they must have the same value today.
For a European call option, they show
that the replicating portfolio always
involves a long position or a positive fraction
of the underlying stock and a short position
in the risk-free bond.
The fraction of stock in the replicating portfolio
is set at each point in time so that it
equals the partial derivative of the call option
value with respect to the stock price, the delta
in this equation here.

Since that sensitivity --
delta -- is constantly changing with remaining maturity
of the option and with the price of the stock,
the number of shares of stock in the replicating portfolio has
to be constantly adjusted as well.
Similarly for a put option, the hedge ratio or delta
for the put is the sensitivity of the put value to changes
in the underlying stock price.
As this relation is negative, it implies a short position
in stocks in the replicating portfolio.
An interesting historical note is
that even though the publication of Bob Merton's version
of the result was in 1974, a year
after that of Black and Scholes, Merton actually
finished his proof first.
The gentleman that he is, he kindly waited for his friends
Fischer Black and Myron Scholes to finish their version
before submitting his result to a journal.
It's helpful to see graphically the idea of using delta
to construct a replicating portfolio.
Here, the situation is illustrated
for a put option when the current stock price is at 100,
and the strike price is fixed at 100.
The x-axis is the underlying stock price,
and the y-axis is the value of the put option, which
is shown by the blue curve, or the value
of the replicating portfolio, which is
going to be this tangent line.
Notice that the current value of the put option
has a shape that's quite similar to the payoff at expiration
of the put option, but the relationship
is a smooth curve rather than a kinked line.
That's because prior to expiration,
there's no sharp difference between the value on each side
of the strike price.
If the put option is slightly out of the money,
it could end up in the money and vice versa.
Now the replicating portfolio is structured
to have the same sensitivity to changes in the stock prices
as does the put option.
That means choosing a delta or share
of stocks based on the slope of the put option value curve
at the current stock price, which
is given by this tangent line.
So we're looking at the current stock price,
and we want a portfolio with the same sensitivity
locally to changes in the stock price as what
we have with the put option.
You can see here that for small changes in the stock price,
the value of the put option and the value
of the replicating portfolio will, in fact, move together.
But for larger changes in price, the two will start to diverge.

This should remind you of the analysis we did earlier
when we were discussing delta gamma
hedging for a bond or fixed income derivative product.
The principle -- the delta comes from the slope of a tangent
line --
is exactly the same in both analyses.
There's one difference that you should keep in mind though.
With stock options, the x-axis is the underlying stock price.
In our earlier analysis of fixed-income derivatives,
the x-axis was the level of interest rates
rather than of bond prices.
We'll see later in the class why this difference arises.
But I want to emphasize here that the basic logic
of both analysis is identical.

There are five inputs into the original Black-Scholes-Merton
formula: the current stock price, the exercise price,
the remaining time to expiration,
the risk-free rate, and the annualized standard deviation
of log stock returns.
The most commonly used version of the formula
also incorporates the possibility
of a constant dividend yield, which
is often noted as little delta.
So here, we finally have it: the Black-Scholes-Merton options
pricing model.
Fanfare, please!
[TRUMPET FANFARE]

This equation says that the value of a European call
option, given the five inputs, is the stock price multiplied
by N of d1 minus the present value of the strike
price multiplied by N of d2.
N represents the cumulative density function
of a standard normal random variable.
The inputs d1 and d2 are both functions
of our five basic inputs.
The value of the corresponding put option
is given by this equation.
It's found using Put-Call Parity.
As with the binomial model, the actual expected return
on the stock doesn't enter into our pricing formula.
It's reflected indirectly, though,
through the current stock price.
Now to implement these pricing formulas,
there's a spreadsheet available with the course materials
called BSMandBlacksmodel.xls.
You can use it for the homework and for the exam.
It uses a built-in function to solve
for the values of the cumulative standard normal distribution.

The example here shows that using the model
is quite straightforward once you've identified the inputs.
The calculation is for an at-the-money option
with a current stock price and strike price of 100.
The interest rate is 5%, and the maturity is one year.
The return volatility on a continuous annual basis
is 30%, which is quite typical for stocks in the United
States.
Plugging in those values, you can calculate d1 or d2,
or your spreadsheet can do it for you.
Then you can calculate the values N of d1 and N of d2
using the formula for the cumulative normal distribution
or, again, using the spreadsheet that's programmed in Excel.
The implied value of the call option is 14.2312.
To find the value of a put option,
you need to N of negative d1 and N of negative d2.
You could solve for those directly.
But since we've already found the values of N of d1
and N of d2, it's simpler to just remember
that N of minus d1 is equal to 1 minus N of d1
and similarly for d2.
Plugging these inputs into the formula
for the value of a put option, you
can verify that it's worth 9.3542.
It's not difficult to extend the Black-Scholes-Merton logic
to the situation where the stock pays a known dividend
or has a known dividend yield.
In the case of a known dividend payment expected
to arrive before the option expiration date,
the original formula used to price puts and calls
can be used with just an adjustment
to the original stock price.
Specifically, the stock price is adjusted down
by the present value of the dividends paid.
That pulls the future distribution of stock prices
down, realistically reflecting that when a dividend is paid,
the value of future cash flows drops
by the amount of the dividend.

Now the case of a constant dividend yield
is more realistic for stock indices.
There, too, the future appreciation
of the value of the index is reduced
by the dividends that are paid.
The adjustments shown here have the same effect
of lowering the entire distribution of future stock
prices, consistent with the dividends
pulling down the remaining value of the underlying stocks.

I want to provide some further interpretation of the BSM model
that will be useful a little while later
when we're discussing dynamic delta hedging strategies.
The fundamental idea behind BSM is that the value of the option
is the same as that of the replicating portfolio of stocks
and bonds.
N of d1 is the fraction of a share of stock
we would hold in the replicating portfolio for a call option.
It equates the sensitivity of the replicating portfolio
value to stock price changes with those of the option.
It's conceptually equivalent to the Delta
we solved for when we found the replicating portfolio
in a binomial model.
The general concept is the same in both cases.
Delta always represents the first-order sensitivity
of the value of an option to the change
in the value of the underlying-- in this case, a stock.
The Delta, then, of a call option
is the partial derivative of the value of the call
option with respect to the underlying stock price
and so in the BSM model, this is given by N of d1.

N of d1 is always positive because this
is a cumulative distribution, which
always lies between 0 and 1.

The Delta of a put option is also a partial derivative
of the value of the option with respect to the underlying stock
and in the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
it's given by minus N of minus d1.
This is always less than 0 because we
have a minus sign multiplying a positive function.
There's also an analog between BSM
and the binomial model for the amount of borrowing
in the replicating portfolio.
Borrowing is given in the BSM model for a call option
by the term here, the strike price discounted and multiplied
by N of d2.

The value of the call option then
equals the value of the replicating portfolio,
delta times S minus the amount of borrowing, which
is represented in the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
by N of d1 times S for Delta times S,
and the discounted value of the strike price times N of d2
represents the amount of borrowing.
Finally, I want to say a few words about the different ways
to derive the Black-Scholes-Merton model
and a fun story about how it first became so famous.
We looked at one of the ways that the BSM formula
can be derived, which is as the limit of the binomial model.
It can also be found in two other related ways.
One is by solving a partial differential equation that
comes out of the replicating portfolio approach directly
and the condition of no arbitrage.
The other is using risk-neutral pricing.
All, of course, give the same result
and are useful for developing intuition about the model.
You can find these derivations in Hull or online.
But in the interest of time, we won't go into them here.
A natural question you might have at this point
is whether BSM really works, given all the assumptions
that are required.
The answer is that it works pretty well
in many circumstances and it is the most common model
used in hedging strategies.

A great story that speaks to the value of the model is this --
before Black, Scholes, and Merton derived the model,
stock options were being actively traded on the Chicago
Board Options Exchange.
Black and Scholes decided to try out their theory there
and started trading based on it.
If they found a stock option price that was too low based
on the model, they bought the option,
and they hedged the position by shorting
the replicating portfolio, and vise versa of the option price
was too high.
Apparently, the other traders initially just ignored them,
figuring they would lose a lot of money
and then retreat to their comfortable university jobs.
But it soon became very clear that Black and Scholes
were making a lot of money trading on their model.
Soon, other traders followed.
And pricing and options markets was forever
altered by the knowledge that options
could be priced scientifically using no arbitrage logic.
