PROFESSOR: We're now going to switch gears one more time
and turn to volatility, its effects on observed options
prices, and how to better incorporate it into our options
pricing models.
Academics and practitioners, seeking
to improve options pricing models,
have focused a lot of energy on volatility modeling,
because the constant volatility assumption is a leading
candidate for why the Black-Scholes-Merton model
often fails to explain the options prices observed
in the market.
We'll start by looking at an example that illustrates
the type of deviations that typically
arise between the Black-Scholes-Merton model
predictions and observed market prices.
We'll then look at approaches to volatility modeling that
have been developed to improve the accuracy of options pricing
models.
The example here is based on data
from May 3rd of 2007, which was a few months
before the onset of the global financial crisis
later that year.
The S&P 500 index was at 1502, the one-month risk free rate
was 4.713% on a continuously compounded basis,
the dividend yield on the S&P 500 was about 1.91%.
Those three inputs into options pricing models
can be observed fairly accurately.
The volatility, however, has to be estimated from data
or inferred from other options prices.
We'll start with an estimate of volatility,
based on using the previous three months of daily stock
returns.
The estimated volatility, then, is based, as usual,
on the average of a square deviation of daily returns
from their mean and we're only using observations
from trading days.
The daily volatility estimate is then
annualized by multiplying by the square root
of the number of trading days in a year, which
is taken to be 252 days.
The resulting estimate of annual volatility in the market
at that time was 12.36%.
Using those inputs, we can calculate the BSM prices
for some of the many put and call
options that were trading in the market on that day.
All of the options shown here have the same maturity date,
and hence the same time to expiration, which is 0.12.
They vary in their strike prices, which
range from 1430 down to 1575.
The current index value of 1,502.39
lies towards the middle of that available range of options.
The next column here shows the ratio of the strike prices
to the index value, which is known
as the moneyness of the option.
Then, both for puts and calls, we
have the market price, the Black-Scholes-Merton estimate
of what the price would be, and then
the ratio of the estimated price over the actual price.
There are several features of this data that
are quite noteworthy and actually typical
of the patterns observed in options prices.
Whereas the Black-Scholes-Merton model prices and market prices
are usually within a few percentage
points of each other for options that
are close to being at-the-money, that
isn't true for other strike prices.
For calls, the largest deviations are for deep
out-of-the-money options, where market values are considerably
lower than those predicted by the Black-Scholes-Merton
formula.
For puts, the largest deviations are for deep out-of-the-money
options, where market values are much higher than those
predicted by the Black-Scholes-Merton formula,
this region here.
The way we're going to interpret this is that it indicates that,
despite the fact that Black-Scholes-Merton prices are
based on a no-arbitrage strategy of dynamic trading
in a replicating portfolio, traders' valuations in fact
seem conservative or pessimistic in the following sense:
the market puts a higher value on the protection value
of out-of-the-money puts against large downward price movements
than predicted by the Black-Scholes-Merton model.
The market is also conservative in treating the upside obtained
from out-of-the-money call options as worth less than
the BSM model predicts.
A slightly different way to characterize
the patterns observed in the table
is to focus on the concept of moneyness.
Again, moneyness is the ratio of the strike price to the index
price, K/S. The table shows that, for both puts and calls,
for options with low moneyness, the Black-Scholes-Merton model
seems to underprice the options, whereas for options
with high moneyness, Black-Scholes-Merton
seems to overprice the options.
This observation is also consistent
with the pessimistic view that the likelihood of very negative
stock returns is higher than what the BSM model assumes,
and that the likelihood of extremely high returns
is lower.
To account for these systematic discrepancies between observed
and model prices, the natural starting point
is to more closely examine the inputs that go into the model.
We have six of these to consider: the strike price,
the time to expiration, the current stock
price, the interest rate, the dividend yield, and volatility.
The first two inputs are specified in the options
contract, and the current stock price is easily observable.
Interest rates and dividend yields are also observable
and they don't vary too much over time.
Moreover, their variation has an opposite effect
on calls and on puts but we saw that mispricing
went in the same direction for puts and calls.
That leaves volatility, then, as the most likely suspect
on our list.
It's harder to predict, and we'll
see that it changes significantly over time.
However, as we'll see on the next slide,
the average level of mispricing may
be related to inaccuracies in our volatility estimate
but adjusting that alone can't explain
why the Black-Scholes-Merton model under-prices out
of the money puts and over-prices in the money
puts, and vice versa for calls.
Hence, we need to consider what else
could explain the mispricing.
The list of additional suspects include
various possible violations of our frictionless markets
assumption, that goes into deriving
the Black-Scholes-Merton model.
Those include limits on dynamic hedging, discontinuous stock
price paths, or other deviations from log normality,
transactions costs, and limits to shorting.
Taken together, these all suggest
that pricing can't be purely done by no arbitrage.
A risk premium also affects option values.
That leaves us with some practical questions
to try to answer.
First, which of these frictions is important enough
to impact pricing?
And how do we need to modify our pricing models
to make them more accurate?
The simplest fix would be if it were simply
a matter of having estimated the volatility
parameter differently than what other market participants were
doing.
Recall, we looked at three months of recent daily returns,
calculated the standard deviation,
and annualized the estimate.
That procedure is intrinsically backwards-looking,
and perhaps traders that were forward-looking
came to a different conclusion about
the appropriate volatility parameter
for the life of the option.
To test this hypothesis, this table
recalculates all of the Black-Scholes-Merton prices
for the puts and calls in this table, but under the assumption
that sigma is 11.5 instead of the 12.4
that was estimated earlier.
The 11.5 was chosen so that the Black-Scholes-Merton model
would correctly price at-the-money options.
As you can see, that change doesn't affect the conclusion
that the Black-Scholes-Merton formula under-prices options
with low moneyness and overprices
those with high moneyness.
We'll need to look further for explanations of these price
patterns.
