
PROFESSOR: Previously, we saw how
to find options prices given a binomial tree representing
stock price evolution.
With implied trees, we start with some
observed options prices and calibrate the stock price
tree to be consistent with those prices.
We can then use the tree to price other options.
For example, consider a binomial tree
calibrated to be consistent with the example we've been looking
at for the S&P 500.
We'll take the current index value to be 1502.4.
Volatility will be 12.36.
The risk free rate is 4.713.
The dividend yield is 1.91.
And the time to expiration of the option is 0.12.
Consistent with these parameters,
we would calibrate u to be e to the sigma root T, as usual.
And we would get 1.0437 for that.
d is 1 over u.
And then the risk neutral probability
is e to the risk free rate minus the dividend
yield times the time to expiration minus d,
over u minus d.
That gives you a q* of 0.5286.
Notice that the q* here looks a little different than it did
in our case when the dividend yield was 0.
Now we have to reduce the drift of the stock price by the fact
that the dividend yield is there,
as we've talked about before.
Well, the price, then, of an option with a strike of 1,500,
according to the model turns out to be 28.394.
And that's higher than what we saw was the traded market
price, which was 20.35.
As shown by the calculations we just went over
on the previous slide and using the tree
based on historical volatility shown here,
we get a price of the put of 28.394, which is
higher than its market value.
So instead of starting with historical volatility
as the basis for calibrating the tree model,
we can alter the binomial tree parameters
to reproduce the observed market prices of the put option.
On this slide, that procedure is described as choosing S1u,
which will imply a new value for u, d and q*.
You can think of choosing S1u as equivalent to choosing
an implied volatility from the observed option price.
In any case, you can solve for it using a computer program
to solve for the option price, where
you can iterate on S1u until you match the observed price.
This slide shows the tree with the value of S1u, 1551.26,
that results in the tree properly pricing the put option
at its market value of 2035.
Once we have the implied tree, we
can use it to price other options.
For instance, consider an option with a strike price of K
equal to 1490, the same time to maturity of 0.12.
The put price from the binomial tree for this option is 15.82.
And if we compare that to the market price
that we have in our table from earlier of 17.05,
we see that it's much closer than had we
tried to price it using our original tree, which
would have implied a large error with a price
prediction of 23.7.
Well, obviously, you want to choose options
in calibrating the tree with prices
that you think are representative of the market.
It's also possible, as you'll see in the recitation,
to extend this idea to a multi-step tree.
That provides the flexibility to treat the volatility
as varying over different future time periods.
That can capture the idea of mean reverting
volatility or other assumptions about its expected time
evolution.
We've covered a lot of useful ground this week,
and I hope you come away from it with a deeper
understanding of the drivers of options prices
and how they're modeled.
We've seen that the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
doesn't price options very accurately.
Given the strong assumptions that it relies on,
perhaps that's not too surprising.
More accurate estimates of option value
can be obtained by incorporating factors
such as stochastic volatility, jumps, and fatter
tailed distributions.
Still, the Black-Scholes-Merton model
is a very useful benchmark.
It gives decent approximations to prices close to the money.
And it typically is used for finding hedge ratios.
If you look at the quotations for options
at the CBOE and elsewhere, you'll
see that the Black-Scholes-Merton model has
become the industry standard for quoting options
in terms of implied volatility.
The BSM model is also used to construct implied volatility
surfaces that provide a simple way
to evaluate the relative value of options
and to look for potential profit opportunities
from temporary mispricing.
The more complicated models do fit the data better,
and you can use them for product pricing and trading strategies
where more accuracy is important.