
PROFESSOR: It would be incorrect for you
to take away from this discussion
that the Black-Scholes-Merton model is just too inaccurate
to be useful for practitioners.
To the contrary, it works reasonably
well for a number of purposes, including hedging options
positions against changes in stock prices,
using delta or delta gamma hedging.
It also remains the basis for widely used implied volatility
calculations and for some price quotations
and while more complicated models
may yield more accurate price predictions,
it turns out to be very valuable to have
a model like the Black-Scholes-Merton model that
can generate price approximations extremely
quickly when speed is essential.
Of course, there are times when a more accurate pricing
tool is valuable, such as if an investment bank wants
to price complicated option contracts that they write,
or when the possibility of early exercise
has a significant effect on value.
A number of modeling approaches have
been developed to provide more accurate options prices
that overcome particular shortcomings
of the Black-Scholes-Merton model.
Those include models where volatility
changes over time, either deterministically
or stochastically.
There's also models that incorporate price jumps.
The implied volatilities from these other models
or from the market prices of options
can be incorporated into what's called an implied tree model,
and then the tree can be used to price other options more
accurately.
All of these models were designed
to deliver results that are consistent with the idea that
out of the money put options are expensive because of the risk
premium associated with the protection against very
large negative returns.
We'll now go on a short tour of some of these models.
You won't be tested on their details,
beyond what appears in homework problems
but you should understand the main ideas and motivations
behind them.
One way to account for the patterns
we observe in implied volatilities
is to incorporate the assumption that volatility is not
constant, but rather, that it's a function of the stock price.
The constant elasticity of variance model shown here
does this by modeling the log of the growth stock return
as having a drift, mu times h, plus a volatility term that's
based on three factors.
The first is the current stock price
taken to the power of alpha.
The second is a constant, which scales volatility.
And the third is a shock drawn from
a standard normal distribution.
This model reduces to the Black-Scholes-Merton assumption
about stock returns when alpha is set equal to 0.
When alpha is negative, it causes return volatility
to increase when stock prices fall.
That implies a volatility smirk consistent with the data.
The reason is that if volatility is high
when stock prices have low moneyness,
that higher volatility will cause both putting call option
values to increase, which in turn increases the implied
volatility.
The most well-known model that incorporates
stochastic volatility is the Heston model,
named after its inventor.
This stochastic volatility model also
captures the smirk and implied volatilities.
In addition, it reflects the empirical fact
that volatility varies considerably over time.
The Heston model specifies a process for stock returns
that has a drift term that, as usual,
represents the expected return over the interval h.
It also has a volatility term based
on the square root of stochastic function v,
and a draw, epsilon 1 at each time t,
from a standard normal distribution.
The innovations in volatility, v of t plus h minus v of t,
are model as being mean reverting.
The mean reversion is at a rate k
so that, when v is below its mean reverting level
v upper bar, it tends to increase.
And when v is above its mean reverting level,
v tends to decrease.
This reflects what we saw in the data,
that periods of higher or lower than normal volatility
tend to be short lived.
There's also a second term in the innovations that
involves a second draw from a standard normal distribution,
epsilon 2.
One can prove that, when you assume
that the correlation between epsilon 1 and epsilon 2
is negative, the model will imply a volatility smirk.
The intuition is that, if epsilon 1 is negative
so that returns are low, then epsilon 2
tends to be positive because of that negative correlation.
That has the effect of increasing
the volatility of the following period when prices are low,
increasing the probability of further price declines,
and increasing the value of insurance against downturns.
It's fairly straightforward to introduce jumps
into the stock return process.
For example, the specification here for the stochastic stock
return between times t and t plus h has three terms--
mu times h, the expected return over an interval of h;
sigma times epsilon, a draw from a standard normal distribution
representing volatility during normal times;
and a jump term, omega times Q of t.
Omega parameterizes the size of the jumps.
Qt is an indicator variable that is 0 most of the time
and equal to 1 with the probability assumed
for a jump occurring.
Omega could be a constant, or it could be modeled as,
itself, a random variable.
If it's constrained to be negative,
it captures the idea that most large jumps in prices
are in fact negative ones.
When it's taken to be negative, it also
induces an implied volatility smirk.
Technically, pricing with jumps involves
additional complications, because relying
on the price of a continuous replication strategy
is no longer possible.
And how to incorporate the price of jump risk
remains a largely unsolved problem.