PROFESSOR: We're now going to switch gears and take
a look at some of the other options
pricing models that were derived using
similar logic to Black-Scholes-Merton
but that take into account the special features of stock
indices, currencies, and options on futures.
Last week, we saw that it just takes
a minor adjustment of the original Black-Scholes-Merton
model to incorporate a known dividend or a known dividend
yield.
Now we're returning to this idea and expanding on it.
For a stock index, the dividend yield is usually fairly stable
at least over moderate periods of time
and it's well-approximated by a constant we'll call q.
Formulas for the price of a put or call option on a stock price
index then is shown here.
Notice that the higher the dividend yield, q,
the higher the value of a put option and the lower
the value of a call option, holding all else equal.
That's because the dividend yield
reduces the average growth rate of the stock price.
That average growth rate is r minus q in a risk-neutral world
and it shows up here in the equation.
You can verify for yourself that if the dividend yield is
set to 0, the formula is identical to the original
Black-Scholes-Merton formula.
The value of a put option on the index
can be found using the put-call parity relationship shown here,
which is also adjusted for the presence of a constant dividend
yield.
It's also noteworthy that you can use this put-call parity
relationship to solve for the implied dividend
yield on the index given the market price of a put and call
option and taking the other inputs into the model as known.
A similar variation on the original Black-Scholes-Merton
formula can be used to price European options on currencies.
It has to account for the implicit dividend
stream on the foreign currency because the currency can
be invested in a risk-free bond paying a rate we call rf where
here the subscript f stands for foreign
rather than the more familiar risk-free.
Well, another way to understand the adjustment
is because of a no-arbitrage condition
which is known as covered interest rate parity.
That states that a foreign currency that pays a higher
interest rate relative to the dollar
must have a correspondingly lower rate of appreciation
against the dollar.
Else, there'd be an arbitrage opportunity.
Well, let's define S0 as the current spot exchange rate
and, to be precise, S0 is the value
of 1 unit of foreign currency in US dollars.
So for example, if the exchange rate
implies that you get one euro per $1.1, then S0 is 1.1.
Notice, though, that this relationship will
be true for any currency pair.
It need not involve the dollar or the euro.
So it's important to keep in mind that the underlying
asset here is consistently being described
as the foreign currency.
That means that the call option formula treats
the currency that's being delivered
in the contract as the foreign currency,
and the put option formula similarly
treats the currency that's being delivered
in the contract as the foreign currency.
Now looking at the pricing formula
for the call option and the put-call parity relationship
here, you can immediately see that these
are the same formulas as we used for a stock
with a constant dividend yield where
the risk-free rate on the foreign currency
is used in place of the assumed dividend yield.
Options on futures contracts are known as futures options.
They can also be priced using the variant
of the original Black-Scholes-Merton formula
that incorporates a constant dividend yield.
To preview the bottom line that comes out of the analysis,
it will turn out that the dividend yield in this case
will be set equal to the risk-free rate.
Well, futures options have a number of potential advantages
over options on the spot market assets,
and that makes them very popular.
One is the liquidity of futures contracts,
which may far exceed the liquidity of the underlying
asset.
Another advantage is that exercising the option
never leads to having to deliver or receive
an underlying asset that one doesn't want
or that's very costly to transfer.
Because futures options typically
trade on the same exchange as the underlying futures
contract, there can also be additional efficiencies
such as an reduced margin requirement.
A useful fact is that European futures options
and European spot options will be equivalent
when the futures contract matures at the same time
as the option expires.
That's because, as we saw, the futures price always
converges to the cash price at the futures contract expiration
date.
A futures call option confers the right
to enter into some number of long futures contracts
at a prespecified futures price, K.
If the option is exercised, the holder gets two things--
first, a long position in the specified number of currently
priced futures contracts and second, the cash difference
between the most recent settlement price on the futures
contracts and the strike price specified
in the futures option.
The effective payoff per futures contract
turns out to be the maximum of the futures price
minus the strike price and 0.
Now, notice that this just reflects
the second item, the cash difference
between the current futures price and the strike price.
Why is that?
It's because the currently priced futures contract
is always worth 0 as we learned way back at the beginning
of this course.
A futures put option is similar.
It confers the right to enter into a short futures
contract at a prespecified futures price,
K. If it's exercised, the holder gets a currently priced
short position in the futures contracts
and receives the cash difference between the strike price
and the most recent futures settlement price.
The effective payoff then is the maximum of the strike price
minus the futures price and 0.
It's also worth noting that popular futures options
contracts include agricultural commodities, energy, metals,
and all sorts of interest rates.
Also note that most futures options
are American, not European.
A very famous and frequently used
formula for pricing various types of futures options
is called Black's model.
It's also frequently used for pricing commodity options.
In fact, one of its advantages in that context
is that by focusing on the forward price at expiration,
it eliminates the need to model the convenience yield
or carrying cost over the life of the options contract.
Some cautions, though, the formula
is for European options.
Hence, you shouldn't really rely on it
when the futures option is American,
and there's the possibility that early exercise will be optimal.
A further caution is that the formula will only
be appropriate for commodities whose forward price can
be reasonably modeled as being log-normally distributed.
We'll see later how it's used for fixed income options,
including pricing short-dated options on bonds and interest
rate caps and floors.
Well, if you look closely at Black's model, which
is shown here, you'll see that it's
equivalent to the model for pricing stock
options with a constant dividend yield
where the dividend yield term is set to be
equal to the risk-free rate.
The intuition behind that adjustment
has to do with the formula for the futures price, which
we know is the spot price multiplied by the future value
factor.
Then with the passage of time, the future value factor
is going to shrink at the rate, r.
That shrinkage has the same effect
as that of a dividend yield on the price of a stock.
Hence, it enters in the same way into the options pricing
formula.
Stepping back, I've introduced all
of these formulas for pricing options
on stock indices, currencies, and futures options
because it's useful for you to know
that they're available and quite straightforward to implement.
You can also use them for setting up
delta and delta gamma hedging strategies using
exactly the same logic as in the example we started with today.