PROFESSOR: We've seen some of the problems that
can arise with delta hedging, namely,
that for the hedge to be effective,
we need to rebalance the portfolio frequently,
which is expensive because of transactions costs that include
the time it takes to make the trades,
and secondly, that the hedge can break down when there are
large changes in stock prices.
As we saw, it caused the failure of portfolio insurance
strategies when the stock market crashed.
Those problems can be alleviated, but not completely
avoided by delta-gamma hedging.
delta-gamma hedging involves adding to the hedge portfolio
a security with a positive gamma.
In the example here, we're using a long position
in a liquid short term traded option to do that.
We're choosing to use a short term traded option,
because they're highly liquid and readily available.
But other securities with a positive gamma
could have been used as well.
For an example of constructing the hedged position,
consider a portfolio we'll call I, which is short the cap
T dated call option, like the one that's embedded
in the capital protected note.
It's long, a fraction n in the stock index, which is currently
at s, and it's also long in the shorter dated call
option that matures the time t1 in an amount nc.
So the short position in the call
is being hedged by these two long positions.
As before, we'll hedge the sensitivity of I
to changes in the stock price, which first means delta hedging
by setting di ds equal to 0.
Now, though, we also want to hedge
against changes in delta, which we will
occur when stock prices change.
This implies also setting the second derivative
of the portfolio.
It's gamma equal to 0.
This graph is a reminder that the capital protected
note provided holders of that security with exposure
to the S&P 500, which was effectively
like what they would have been able to get
if they could buy a very long dated call option on the index.
The replicating portfolio used in a delta hedging strategy
locally protects the issuer of the capital
protected note, because its value changes
by the same amount for small changes in the S&P 500 index.
Here, initially, the index was at 10.
And the delta hedging strategy was set up,
so that for small stock price changes around 10,
the change in the replicating portfolio
would mirror the change in the value of the structured note.
Delta-gamma hedging requires setting
the first and second derivatives of our hedged portfolio
I to 0 with respect to the underlying stock value s.
The strategy also involves rebalancing the hedge
over time.
So differentiating the expression for I
once with respect to s, we get the delta of that portfolio,
which will set equal to 0.
And then differentiating it a second time,
we get the gamma or convexity of the portfolio, which we also
set equal to 0.
This gives us two linear equations and two unknowns,
the fraction of the stock, and the number
of short term call options, nc.
We can solve the second equation directly for nc.
It implies that nc is the ratio of the gamma of the option we
have a short position in and the gamma of the option we're
using to hedge the curvature.
This makes intuitive sense, that the larger
the gamma of the position being hedged relative to the option
we're using to hedge it, the larger the size of the hedge
position needs to be.
Well, once we know nc, we can solve
for n using first equation, and we get this expression for m.
Notice that the position in stocks
here is different than if we had only delta
hedged, and that's generally the case
when we do delta-gamma hedging.
In this case, the long position of the stock is smaller.
That's because part of the delta hedge
is being accomplished by the delta of the short term call
option, and in this case, that delta is positive.
We'll now apply this methodology to the capital protected
note example and see how much the strategy is
likely to improve over just delta hedging.
We calculated last time that the at the money short call
per unit of the index had a value of 1.7.
Plugging our assumptions into the BSM formulas
for the delta and gamma of this option, the gamma is 0.08,
and the delta is 0.5747.
Let's also imagine that we're going to use a one year call
option as part of the hedge, and let's
hold the other assumptions, of course, as before.
Well, we find that option we're using to hedge is worth 0.6443,
that it has a gamma of 0.2575, and that it
has a delta of 0.5512.
Putting this information into the equation
for the number of one year call options, nc,
we find that we need 0.3113 in that long call option position.
Turning to the position in the replicating portfolio
in the stock, we get n equals 0.4031.
And then, finally, we find the position
in bonds in the usual way, which is
to take the difference between the call option
and the value of the risky part of the hedge portfolio.
We find that we need a short position in bonds
equal to minus 2.53.
Just a few comments I want to add here.
You should loopback at last week's notes
and compare the replicating portfolio we just
derived with the one last week that employed a pure delta
hedge.
You'll see that this portfolio today involves a smaller
position in the stock index, because, again, the short term
call option contributes its positive delta
to the replicating portfolio.
Another option observation I want
to make that might not seem as obvious at first
is that you could have accomplished
the same delta-gamma hedge using a put option in place
of the short term call option and as the source
of positive convexity.
Note, though, that because the put option has
a negative delta, it would have implied
that the position in the stock in the replicating portfolio
would have actually been larger than it
would have been in the case of pure delta hedging.
In general, the choice of which option to use,
as we've seen for other strategies,
generally comes down to cost and liquidity.
Turning back to the diagram of the sensitivity
of the current value of the capital protected note
to the stock index value, we can compare it
to the sensitivity of the replicating portfolio
for a delta hedge and for a delta-gamma hedge.
The replicating portfolio for a delta hedge
as before as represented by the tangent line
at the current normalized index value of 10.
As we saw before, the delta hedge
tracks the price fairly well between, say,
an index value of nine and 11, so for about this region.
For larger stock price movements,
the tracking error starts to become significant.
The replicating portfolio for the delta-gamma hedge
is shown by the dotted line.
You can see that it more closely follows
the curvature of the value of the capital protected note
and provides pretty good protection for a significantly
wider range of stock price movements
approximately for stock prices between eight and 13.
This slide summarizes the key points.
The delta-gamma hedging strategy offers protection
against considerably larger swings in stock prices
and so allows for less frequent rebalancing.
In the example we just looked at,
it widened the region of stock prices, where the hedge was
effective from a range of about nine to 11
to a range of about eight to 13.
An advantage then of delta-gamma hedging
is that it can economize on transactions costs,
because it allows for less frequent portfolio rebalancing.
An offsetting factor, though, is that using options
as part of the hedge can be more expensive than just
trading in the stock for a delta hedging strategy.
The gamma hedge is also valuable,
because it protects better against jumps
in stock prices, which can cause delta hedges to fail badly.
A final observation is that the capital protected
note was marketed as a great way of achieving stock market
exposure, while protecting your principal.
In fact, the value of the capital
protected note will vary over time with the stock price
as the diagram shows and could easily fall below $10.
So while the capital protected note
does protect the initial capital at the horizon of seven years,
it doesn't really offer capital protection along the way.
