
PROFESSOR: It's well-known that the lognormal model for stock
prices fails to accurately capture
the historical distribution of observed stock prices.
The empirical distribution has what's known as "fatter tails."
That is, there's a higher chance of very large negative returns
and also a higher chance of very high returns
than the best fit of a lognormal distribution to the data
would imply.
Remember also that, if prices are lognormally distributed,
then returns--
inclusive of dividends-- are normally distributed.
That fact is illustrated in the graph where the red bars are
from the histogram constructed from a stock market return
data.
The smooth graph is the fitted distribution of returns,
assuming a normal distribution.
You can see that the fitted distribution attributes
too low a probability to the tails
of the empirical distribution.
It's hard to tell from the previous graph exactly how
large the tail deviations are from what
would be expected if returns were normally distributed.
This interesting table is from an article
on the website Seeking Alpha.
It shows the number of expected versus realized occurrences
of daily stock market realizations
that are greater than 1 standard deviation, 2
standard deviations, et cetera, going all the way out
to 9 standard deviations.
It shows that there are 163 events that
exceeded 4 standard deviations based on the best
fit of a normal distribution versus the 1 event
the theory predicts would be that large.
Consistent then with the previous graph,
it also shows that the frequency of moves
that are less than 1 standard deviation
are more likely than is captured by a normal distribution.
These sorts of tabulations have led researchers
to consider fat-tailed distributions--
like the student's t-distribution
or the Laplace distribution-- as candidates
to better fit the data.
To what extent the value of the stock market
moves smoothly over time is a topic
of debate among academic economists.
Well, even if stock prices are in some theoretical sense
continuous, as a practical matter,
traders experience prices as having
sometimes significant jumps.
For example, there are periods when markets are closed--
such as overnight-- when price movements are unobservable
and by the time the markets reopen,
prices can be far different than they were at the previous day's
close.
And even as a theoretical matter, what moves
stock prices is new information.
If there is an announcement of an event that
affects the market broadly--
such as a surprise increase in inflation
or a fall in unemployment or a declaration of war--
those could all cause the index value to jump.
This graph plots high-frequency percentage price changes
for the US stock market over the same period
as shown in the previous graph.
Clearly, there are episodes that appear
to be jumps that range from about minus 20% to positive
15%.
For individual stocks, which trade far less frequently,
there can be many sources of new information
that significantly move the price
and thereby can create a jump.
You might expect that to happen, for instance, when
the company announces that it plans
on making a large acquisition or that it will itself
be acquired by another firm.
