
PROFESSOR: We now know how to price equities in relation
to their future dividends and discount rates.
Expected future dividends are an important input
into equity pricing.
Forecasting dividends is a complex problem.
Our approach here is to relate dividends of the firm
to other fundamentals.
In particular, we are going to relate firm's dividends
to its profits.
For simplicity, we assume that the firm
is all equity financed.
It does not have debt and makes no interest payments.
We start with firm's profits, its earnings per share,
which we define net of depreciation and taxes.
Dividends are related to earnings by the payout ratio.
The payout ratio is simply a ratio of dividends per share
to earnings per share.
This ratio tells us what fraction of firm's earnings
is paid out to its investors.
The remaining profits are reinvested into the firm.
Algebraically, dividends per share
are equal to earnings per share times the payout ratio.
Next, we think about how to forecast earnings.
The key input into the forecast is retained earnings.
Retained earnings are equal to the difference between earnings
and dividends and represent the portion of the firm's cash
flows reinvested into the business.
The fraction of the earnings retained by the firm
is called the plowback ratio.
It is the ratio of retained to total earnings
and is equal to 1 minus the payout ratio.
For example, if a firm generates $2.00 per share in earnings
and pays out $0.80 to its investors,
then the payout ratio is 40% and the plowback ratio is 60%,
with $1.20 reinvested into the firm.
We should note, as an aside, that by accumulating
retained earnings over time, we can
keep track of the firm's book value of equity, which
is an accounting measure of firm value.
Unlike the market value of equity,
which is a forward looking measure of firm value,
the book value is backward looking
and is simply a summary of the history of firm's investments.
Firms' investments generate incremental cash flows
in the future.
We assume, for simplicity, that an investment at time t
generates a constant, perpetual stream of additional cash flows
starting from the next period, t plus 1.
We will also assume that, without additional investments,
firms expect that future earnings remain constant.
We make both of these assumptions for simplicity
in order to focus on the conceptual elements
of this analysis.
One can replace these assumptions
with a more realistic and complex model of how investment
generates incremental earnings.

Consider the following example.
A company, Texas Western, or TW, is expected to earn $1.00 per
share next year.
The firm plans an expansion to increase its earnings
by 8% per year.
Without these additional investments, earnings of TW
are expected to remain constant forever.
Each additional dollar of investment generates
incremental perpetual cash flow of $0.10 starting
in the following period.
We assume that all new investment is
financed by retained earnings.
The discount rate is 10%.
We assume that this discount rate applies to all future cash
flows of the firm.
Our task is to determine the price of TW shares and the two
alternative growth strategies.
In the first case, TW pays out all of its earnings
forever and does not invest.
In the second case, TW expands and grows its earnings forever
at 8% per year.

We start with the case of no investment.
In this case, the firm pays out 100% of its earnings.
Without investment, earnings of TW remain at the same expected
level of $1.00 per share forever.
Because the payout ratio is 100%,
dividends per share are also expected to be $1.00 forever.
Applying the 10% discount rate to future dividends, we find,
using the perpetuity formula, that the initial price
of the stock is $10.00 per share.
Next consider the case of perpetual growth.
TW aims to grow its earnings at the rate of 8% per year.
The first question we must answer is, at what rate
should TW reinvest its earnings to achieve
the 8% rate of growth?
In other words, we want to determine the required plowback
ratio.
Suppose that, at time t, TW invests fraction
b of its earnings.
This investment raises all future earnings
by 10% of the total amount invested,
which is the plowback ratio times its earnings in period t.
As a result, earnings per share at time t plus 1
are equal to the EPS in the previous period times 1
plus 0.1 times the plowback ratio.
We conclude that to achieve an 8% growth rate,
the firm must use the plowback ratio of 80%.
The payout rate must then equal 20%.
Under the permanent expansion at the 8% rate,
dividends per share in the first year are expected to be $0.20,
which is 20% of the expected earnings.
Using the constant growth model, the initial price
of the stock of TW is equal to the expected dividend,
next period, divided by the difference between the discount
rate and the expected dividend growth rate.
The initial stock price is then $10.00 per share.
The price of the stock is the same as in the no growth
scenario.
Why are the two values the same?
The reason is firm's future investments
do not add anything to the firm value.
Each time TW invests $1.00, it generates a perpetual cash flow
stream of $0.10, starting a period later.
The NPV of this investment with the discount rate of 10% is 0.
As we will learn in the following section,
this means that TW has no growth opportunities.
Because our assumptions imply that all new investments are
0 NPV, the value of TW does not depend on its growth strategy.