
PROFESSOR: So far, we talked about the valuation of stocks.
But the same techniques can be used
to value the entire business.
We don't need to be focusing just on equities.
So let's start with the discounted cash flow formula.
The present value of the business
is equal to the discounted expected value of the free cash
flows that the business generates
between time 1 and time capital T plus the present value
of the remaining cash flows, which we call PV capital
T discounted back to time zero.
What you see here is that we are splitting the timeline
into two portions.
We're discounting cash flows between time 1 and time capital
T separately.
And then we are discounting the residual,
which we call the horizon value a time capital T.
We are focusing on the free cash flows, which
is net cash flows that can be attributed to the business
that we are evaluating.
In order to apply this formula, we
need to forecast cash flows from time 1 to time capital T.
And we need to predict the horizon value, PV capital T.
In our previous analysis, we focused
on the forecasting of payouts, dividends, or in this case,
we can use the same techniques for free cash flows.
What we now need to do is figure out
how to predict the horizon value PV capital
T. This is the focus of our current discussion.
There are several alternative methods
that one could use to forecast the horizon value.
We are going to look at three alternatives.
The first method uses P/E multiples.
What this means is that we are going
to forecast the profits that this business generates at time
capital T. And then scale them by the P/E multiple, which
is a typical price-to-earnings ratio that is applied to stocks
that we view as comparable to the business
that we're evaluating.
The second approach is similar in nature.
We're also using comparables.
We're also looking for the valuation
ratios of similar firms, similar traded businesses.
But instead of the P/E ratio, we're
using the price-to-book ratio, which
is the ratio of the market price of equity to its book value.
The last approach is what we call the DCF approach.
In this case, we do not use valuation multiples.
We are determining the horizon value using the discounted cash
flow formula by making particular assumptions
about future growth of the business after time capital T.
Now, what is the logic behind using multipliers
versus the DCF approach?
The multiplier approach is a particular type
of relative valuation.
It is a relative valuation approach
where we are looking for companies
that are similar to the firm under consideration.
And we're asking how much the market
is paying for those businesses in relation
to either their book value or the profits
that they're generating.
The challenge with using this approach
is that businesses generally are not the same.
It is not easy to find two firms that
are very close comparables.
What we're doing here is a hybrid approach,
where we are forecasting cash flows
over the first several periods explicitly.
And we're discounting them.
And then we're applying the multiples approach
at time capital T.
The logic of this is that even though it
may be quite difficult to find very good comparable firms
at time zero, this gets progressively easier as we
are looking into the future.
And the reason for that is that there
tends to be a certain degree of convergence
between different types of firms in expectation.
So the firms that look very different at time zero
in expectation look less different.
And therefore, the multiples approach
becomes more and more accurate.
Now, one can say that the multiples approach is not
a pure fundamental approach to valuation because rather
than discounting cash flows, we're using multiples.
At the end of the day, the DCF formula,
the multiples approach, are different versions
of relative valuation.
If we want to use a pure DCF approach,
we're going to make assumptions about future growth
of the firm.
For example, if we assume that beyond certain horizon
the firm exhausts its growth opportunities, for instance,
competition catches up.
And the firm can no longer make positive NPV investments.
We can figure out what the horizon value is.
It is going to be equal to the free cash flow at time capital
T plus 1 under the no-growth assumption discounted
as a perpetuity without growth.
So it's free cash flow time t plus 1
divided by the opportunity cost of capital.
Consider the following example or the data given in the table.
We have a business here, which starts
with the asset value of 5.
Think of it as 5 million.
And it grows over time.
For each period, from 1 to six, we
can see how the asset value evolves.
How this business generates earnings.
And we can see net investment.
That investment is the investment into the business
in the form of CAPX, capital expenditure,
net of depreciation.
Earnings here are also measured net of depreciation.
Now, the free cash flow that this business generates
is equal to earnings minus its net investment.
This is the cash flow that is left after the firm reinvests
back into the business.
We make an assumption about the discount rate.
The discount rate is constant at 15%.
And therefore, we can compute the discount factor,
which is then applied to cash flows in different periods.
This is given at the bottom of the table.
In our example, the company is going
through two stages of growth.
In the first few years, growth rate is relatively high.
And the firm is reinvesting a lot back into the business.
And therefore, the free cash flow may in fact be negative.
This does not mean that the firm is losing money.
It simply means that the firm is investing more
than the cash it is generating.
After the first few years, growth rate
slows down and investment declines accordingly.
The present value of this business
can be computed as the present value of the free cash
flows of the first several years for 1
to capital T plus the present value of the horizon value
at time capital T. We will now use our three
alternative approaches to estimate the present value
of the business.
Let's start with the multiples approach, the P/E multiples,
in particular.
We are going to discount free cash flows from 1 to 4.
And then apply the multiples approach
to figure out the horizon value at time 4.
The present value of the free cash flows from 1 to 4
is minus $1.42.
This reflects the fact that the firm in the early periods
is investing more than the cash flow it is generating.
To estimate the horizon value, PV4,
we need to apply the P multiples for comparable firms
to the expected earnings of the firm at time 5,
one period forward.
Expected earnings generated at time 5 are estimated at $1.75.
Let's assume that the P multiple for comparable firms
is equal to six.
In which case, we are going to multiply the expected
that earnings at time 5 by a factor of six
to estimate the horizon value at time 4, PV4.
The present value of this horizon value is $10.50,
which is the value at time 4 discounted at the 15% rate back
to time zero, which is $6.
Next, let's estimate the firm value, the business value,
using the price-to-book multiples.
The logic is very similar to the previous calculation.
Except now, instead of using the ratio of price-to-earnings
for comparable firms, we are going
to use the ratio of price-to-book, the market
value of equity divided by the book value.
Again, we're estimating the horizon value at time 4.
The book value at time 4, the value of the assets, is $11.75.
And this gets scaled by the average book-to-price ratio
for comparable firms, which we assume to be equal to 1.2.
As a result, our estimate of the horizon value is $14.10.
And discounted back to time zero at the 15% rate,
this gives us $8.06.
Our final calculation uses the pure DCF approach.
Under this approach, we have to establish a point in time
beyond which the firm is expected to have no remaining
growth opportunities.
For the sake of the argument, suppose that that period is T
equal to 5.
From that point on, the firm is going
to produce no positive NPV.
And therefore, at time 5, we comprise the horizon value
using the no growth formula.
Let's do that.
Between periods 1 and 5, the free cash flows of the firm,
after being discounted back to time zero,
adapt to minus $0.95.
The present value at time 5 can be
computed as the earnings, which is what the firm would pay out
with the no growth assumption.
Discounted at the cost of capital, 15%.
Because without growth, the firm would
be expected to pay $1.88, which is the earning set times 6
in perpetuity.
At the end of this, we find that the horizon value at time 5
is estimated to be $12.55.
And discounted back to time 0, this gives us $6.24.
Notice that we are using different horizons,
capital T under these alternative relation
approaches.
This is just to highlight the fact
that there is no reason to pick the same horizon when
we're using the multiples approach versus DCF.
The logic is not identical.
Under the multiples approach, we are comparing the firm
to other similar firms.
We simply want to find the point in time when we think
this comparison is accurate.
Under the pure DCF approach, we are finding a point a time
beyond which we feel comfortable forecasting firm growth.
In this particular example, we are finding a point in time
beyond which the firm has no remaining growth opportunities.
And therefore, the value of the firm
can be computed under the no growth assumption.
We now pull together our estimates.
Using the P multiples, we estimate the present value
to be $4.58.
Under the price-to-book multiple approximation,
we find the present value to be $6.64.
And using the pure DCF approach, the value is $5.29.
The solution using the P/E multiples
gives us the most conservative estimate of the firm value.
Now, firm valuation is not a simple problem.
And our estimates are based on a number
of simplifying assumptions.
What we get from this analysis is the sense
of the range of likely values.
This range can be fairly wide, which is
what our analysis illustrates.
In order to apply these results, we have to look further.
We have to study sensitivity of these numbers
to their underlying assumptions.
At the end of the day, what we find
is that valuation is not a simple problem.
However, we now have the tools to tackle it.