
PROFESSOR: In this lecture, we're
going to talk about the relation of stocks.
We're going to start with a quick overview of equities,
stocks and securities, and the markets where they trade,
and then introduce the basic tools for equity valuation.
Now, stocks are relatively well known financial securities.
Common stocks represent equity or ownership positions
in the corporation.
They allow for a distributed form of ownership
of public companies.
When your own shares of a stock, let's
say, your own shares of IBM, you effectively
are one of the owners of the company.
You may own a small fraction of the company in proportion
to the number of shares, but you are one of the owners.
And this is how large public companies
can be owned by large groups of investors
through their ownership of stocks.
Stocks deliver payments to their owners
in the form of dividends, which are cash payments and share
repurchases, which are transactions
in the market where the company buys back its own shares.
These are different types of transactions.
They have different properties, but the end result is the same.
By paying dividends or by buying back shares,
the company is able to distribute cash back
to its owners, back to the shareholders.
If you compare ownership of stocks to ownership of bonds,
payments to the bond holders are contractual.
They're fixed in the definition of the security.
They're not discretionary.
In contrast, payments to the stockholders are discretionary,
and they're uncertain.
The timing of these payments and their amount
are not guaranteed, and are subject to the discretion
of the management and to various types of risks,
business risks to which the company is
exposed, market conditions changing, and so forth.
Stocks have several important basic characteristics.
One is that stocks are what we call residual claims.
Stockholders get paid after the company has paid its creditors.
In other words, stocks are relatively
junior in the capital structure of the firm compared
to debt obligations.
The company has to repay its bonds.
If there is money left after that,
it can pay the stockholders.
Stocks are limited liability instruments.
What this means is that when you buy a share of a company,
you can lose as much as the entire investment, but no more
than that.
For example, if you own a fraction of a company by owning
shares and the company is the subject of a lawsuit,
whatever the settlement may be, you cannot lose more than
your investment.
Your own personal assets are not on the line.
This is what is called limited liability.
Limited liability is an important feature
of many financial securities, and as you can see,
it is a key to allowing for distributed ownership.
Stocks also confer voting rights to their owners.
Stockholders can participate in corporate governance.
They can vote on important corporate events.
For example, they can vote during elections
for the board of directors.
They can vote on large corporate actions,
like mergers and acquisitions.
They can vote on executive compensation and so forth.
Day to day operations of the firm are run by the management.
Firm owners, the shareholders, are not
involved in these tactical decisions,
but they can be involved in strategic actions,
such as mergers and acquisitions.
And they can participate by voting.
How exactly the votes are distributed in relation
to share ownership depends.
It varies firms to firm, but typically, it
is one share, one vote.
The more shares you own, the more votes you control.
When we think about trading of stocks,
we can conceptually think about two types
of markets, the primary market and the secondary market.
The primary market transaction is
a transaction between the firm and its investors shareholders.
For example, if it's a relatively young firm,
it doesn't trade in the public markets.
It is raising money from investors.
For instance, it may be raising money
from a venture capital firm.
It engages in a primary market transaction.
It would issue shares and sell them to a VC company
to raise capital.
At a later stage as the firm matures,
it may get listed for public trading,
and then it would sell its shares to the broader
group of investors.
This event is called an initial public offering, the IPO.
That's when the shares of the firm
get listed on one of the standard exchanges.
This is also a primary market transaction.
The company is selling shares to its investors.
At a later stage in the lifecycle, the firm,
the company can raise more capital
from investors in the form of equity.
It may sell additional shares.
This is called a secondary equity offering, an SEO.
Again, it's a transaction between the firm
and its investors.
These types of transactions when the firm is raising money
from investors are typically facilitated
by financial intermediaries, like investment banks.
They help to make sure that this process goes smoothly,
the firm is able to raise the desired amount of capital,
and the shares go into the hands of the right types
of investors.
These transactions are called underwriting.
When we think about the secondary market,
this is the market where shares get traded between investors.
This market does not involve the firm itself.
This is a resale market.
This is what most of the investors are familiar with,
and this is where most of the trading takes place.
By now, there are many competing exchanges
where trading takes place, as well as
additional trading venues.
Some of the best known exchanges and those controlling
the largest percentage of the trading volume in the United
States and globally are NYSE, New York Stock Exchange, CBOE,
the Chicago Board of Options Exchange, and NASDAQ.
These exchanges are regulated by the SEC.
They are subject to regulatory oversight,
and they have to maintain certain standards
and provide investor protection.
There are also other ways to buy and sell securities.
These are called, broadly, alternative trading systems.
These include electronic communication networks,
which provide trading venues outside of the exchanges.
They include dark pools and so forth.
These types of trading venues are not exchanges.
They're not subject to the exact same regulations.
They still are subject to regulatory oversight,
but the rules are different.
They typically register them as broker dealers,
and they're not required to provide
the same level of transparency, for example, as exchanges do.
They also tend to operate during other hours
when exchange may be closed, alternative training venues
would be open, and they generally
have different economic trade offs, different cost structure.
A significant fraction of trading
nowadays goes through these alternative trading venues.
As you can see from the graph, as you
look at the distribution of trading
across the largest exchanges, the stock market
nowadays is highly fragmented.
There are many competing players, and none of them
dominates the market in terms of the trading volume.
There are several leading exchanges.
Some of them are owned by the NYSE group.
Some are owned by CBOE.
They may conduct 5%, 10% of the daily volume of trade,
on average, in various securities, but none of them
control the majority of trading in the equity market.
Over time, the volume of trading has been rising.
If you look over the 30 year period from 1984 until now,
the overall volume of trading on the New York Stock Exchange
increased almost tenfold.
Part of this increase can be explained by the fact
that the overall market is growing,
and that can be seen from the rising level of the stock
market index.
That's not the whole story.
However, trading nowadays is largely electronic,
and the volume of trading has been rising sharply
over the last two decades.
And this partly reflects the rise of high frequency trading
strategies, which accounts for a significant fraction of trading
volume in equity markets.
