
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we will
learn how to think about growth opportunities,
how to value them, and how much opportunities for future growth
contribute to the price of the stock.
First, define what the growth opportunities are.
Growth opportunities are future investment opportunities
that generate a positive NPV.
Such investment opportunities contribute positively
to the firm value.
Stocks of companies with access to future growth opportunities
are considered growth stocks.
The term growth stock is used casually
to refer to firms which would not
be called growth stocks under our formal definition.
For example, a firm with growing sales
is not necessarily investing at a positive NPV,
as we have seen in our example of Texas Western.
Same goes for the firms with growing assets or growing
dividends.
The bottom line-- a growth firm is
a firm able to make positive NPV investments in the future.
Our objective is to figure out how to value such growth
opportunities.
Consider the following example.
Expected earnings per share of ABC Software
will be $8.33 next year.
ABC will pay out 60% of its earnings as dividends forever.
Assume that new investments will generate
a perpetual expected cash flow stream of $0.25
for each dollar invested.
The discount rate for all cash flows is 15%.
We need to figure out what portion of firm value
reflects the value of its growth opportunities.
To do that, we compute the price of the stock
in two different ways--
with and without growth.
We define the present value of growth opportunities, or PVGO,
as the difference between the actual stock price
and the price that would apply without growth,
which would correspond to 100% payout and no investment.
We first compute the stock price with growth.
The expected dividend per share in the first year
is 60% of expected earnings, which is $5.
Under the parameters of the problem,
both earnings and dividends of the firm
are expected to grow at the 10% rate.
To see this, compute the expected earnings
in the second period.
Investment in the first period is 40% of the firm's earnings,
or $3.33 per share.
Each dollar investment raises future earnings by $0.25.
So the first period investment raises second period earnings
by $0.83 relative to the first period.
This implies a 10% growth rate.
The same argument applies to all future periods.
So both earnings and dividends are
expected to grow at the 10% rate forever.

The price of the stock is given by the constant growth formula.
Stock price at time 0 equals the expected dividend
in the first period divided by the difference
between the discount rate and the dividend growth rate.
This means that the initial stock price is $100 per share.
Under the no growth policy, the firm
pays out all of its earnings as dividends.
In this case, dividends in the first period
are $8.33 per share.
The value of the stock is given by the constant growth formula.
Without growth, this is simply the expected dividend
next period over the discount rate,
which equals $55.56 per share.
The difference between the stock price with and without growth
is $44.44.
This represents the present value
of growth opportunities of ABC.
Next, we take a closer look at how future investments of ABC
add to the firm value.
At time 1, ABC invests 40% of its earnings, which
equals the $3.33 per share.
With each dollar producing $0.25 in addition of future earnings,
the time 1 investment generates additional expected earnings
of $0.83 in all future periods, starting with period two.
The NPV of the time 1 investment is the present value
of the perpetual stream of $0.83 per year.
Net of the initial investment of $3.33, which adds up to $2.22.
At time 2, the same logic applies.
Because the magnitude of the firm's investment rises by 10%,
all resulting cash flows grow by 10% as well.
And so does the NPV of its investment.
We conclude that the NPV of the time 2 investment
is 10% higher than the NPV of the time 1 investment
and equals $2.44.
Applying the same valuation process to all future years,
we find that firm investments generate a stream of NPVs
growing at 10% per year.
The total present value of ABC's future investment
is then given by the constant growth formula.
The initial cash flow is the NPV of the time 1 investment.
The discount rate is 15%, and the growth rate is 10%.
This implies the present value of growth opportunities
of $44.44 per share, which is the same value we uncovered
by comparing the price of the stock with and without growth.