
PROFESSOR: We started this week by observing
that valuation ratios seem to be systematically
different across different types of firms.
Financials and automakers are trading
at different valuation ratios, or different P/E ratios.
We can now see that one reason why
firms may trade at different P/E ratios
is because of differences in their growth opportunities.
Let's take a closer look.
Suppose that the ROE of the firm is constant over time.
The price of the stock has two components.
One component represents the value of the firm
without growth and the second component
reflects the value of future growth opportunities, PVGO.
The value of the firm without growth
is given by the expected earnings
at time 1, which are going to continue
in perpetuity without growth, divided by the cost of capital
R. The present value of growth opportunities
is the discounted value of the NPV of future investments
that the firm makes.
Now let's define the P/E ratio formula.
The P/E ratio under our definition
is the ratio of the price of the stock at time 0 to the expected
earnings at time 1.
Our definition is different from the common definition used
in the business media, where the price of the stock at time 0
is divided by the lagged earnings, which
are also measured at time 0.
Now let's use our formula.
The price of the stock is equal to the expected earnings
divided by the cost of capital plus the present value
of growth opportunities.
Suppose that the firm does not have any growth opportunities.
PVGO is 0.
In this case, the P/E ratio is equal to 1 over r,
1 over the cost of capital.
If the present value of growth opportunities is positive,
the P/E ratio is equal to 1 over r plus the ratio of PVGO,
the earnings at time 1, or specifically expected earnings
at time 1.
What we see is that for the firm with higher present value
of growth opportunities, the P/E ratio
is higher, which means that P/E ratio reflects
how rich the firm is in growth opportunities.
This is one of the reasons why we observe different valuation
ratios, different price to earnings ratios,
across different industries and across different types
of firms.
This reflects different growth prospects
that these firms are facing.