
PROFESSOR: We will now develop a basic valuation model
for equities called Discounted Cash Flow Model, or DCF Model.
Let's look at the prices of several financial companies.
These are large banks like J.P. Morgan, Bank of America,
and so forth.
In the table, you can see prices per share
as well as earnings per share and the valuation ratios,
such as the price to earnings ratio of price to sales ratio.
What is interesting about this is
that these firms are very different in terms
of their overall size, or market cap.
Some of them extremely large, like Bank
of America and JP Morgan Chase, some are a lot smaller.
But when we look at their valuation ratios,
such as the price to earnings ratio,
those ratios are fairly close to each other.
What this suggests, what this pattern is telling us,
is that there is something that all of these financial firms
seem to have in common as far as their valuation is concerned.
The market is pricing these stocks
at a similar multiple in relation to their earnings.
Let's compare this to the automakers.
Now we are looking at various car manufacturers, Toyota,
Volkswagen, BMW, and so forth.
Again, these companies are very heterogeneous in terms
of their overall size.
Their valuation ratios also tend to be closely related
to each other.
They are lower than those for the banks.
So what is going on?
Why is it that car manufacturers are
priced on average at the lower level
as a fraction of their earnings, as a P/E multiple,
compared to banks?
What determines valuation of different types of stocks?
That's the question that we want to answer.
We're going to start with very basic theoretical observations.
Let's look at the present value of a security
a stock in this case and relate it to the cash flows,
the dividends.
This is going to give us the discounted cash flow model.
Our notation is going to be Pt for the expected stock
price at time t, this is the ex-dividend price,
the price of the security immediately
after it pays off the dividend.
Dt is the expected dividend at time t.
And Rt is the expected stock return over period t.
We start with an accounting identity,
the definition of returns.
1 plus the expected return is equal to the total cash
flow at time 1, which is the dividend
plus the price of the security, P1, divided
by the initial price, P0.
This is the definition of expected return, R1.
We can rewrite this formula to express
the price of the security at time 0 in relation
to the expected dividend a time 1,
the expected price at time 1, and the expected return.
The price at times 0 is equal to D1 plus P1, the expected
period for time 1 discounted at R1,
the expected rate of return.
The lesson here is that the price
can be computed as expected cash flow discounted at the discount
factor, which is equal to the expected
return on the security.
This relation is an accounting of mathematical identity.
It doesn't rely on any economic assumptions.
It is simply true because of how we define returns
on securities.
Now let's use our pricing formula and iterate forward.
We are going to substitute out P1.
We will replace it by the discounted value of D2 plus P2.
What we obtain as a result is the relation within the price
at time 0 and the dividend at time 1, the dividend at time 2,
and the price at time 2.
Again, the price at time 0 is a discounted value of future cash
flows at time 1 and 2.
To simplify, let's assume that expected returns
during every period are the same, they're equal to R.
We can continue this process, continue moving forward,
substituting out the price using our one period DCF
formula to obtain the following equation, the price at time 0
is equal to the sum of the expected dividends
during future periods discounted at the rate of return R
plus the residual term, which is the price at time capital
T discounted at the rate of return, again,
our expected return of the stock.
The price of the stock is therefore
equal to the discounted value of future dividends
plus the discounted value of the terminal price, Pt.
The discount factor equals the expected stock return.
If we take this sum to a limit by letting capital
T go to infinity and make an additional assumption
that the discounted value of the terminal price, p capital T,
converges to 0, we obtain an infinite horizon discounted
cash flow formula, which tells us
that the price of the stock at time 0
is equal to the discounted value of future dividends from 1
to infinity, where each expected future dividend is discounted
at the expected rate of return on the stock.