
PROFESSOR: Next, we consider multi-stage growth models.
The Gordon model, the constant growth model,
is a useful approximation.
It's also a useful building block
for constructing more realistic models.
But of course, the assumption of constant growth
forever is typically not a good approximation
to how real firms behave.
It is more realistic to think of the company
as going through different stages of growth
throughout its lifecycle.
When the firm is young, it may start small and grow rapidly
by capturing an increasing market share.
Over time, as the company grows larger and larger,
it's going to be harder to maintain the same growth rate.
There may be some initial competitive advantages
that the firm has.
Over time, competition is going to catch up.
Also, as the company gets large in terms of its market share,
increasing the market share further is going to become
progressively difficult. So in the long run,
we cannot expect large, established firms to grow
at the same rate as young growth firms.
The way to model this is to assume
that in the early stages, the company may
go through a so-called growth stage
with a relatively high growth rate, which will eventually
slow down.
And long term, the company is going
to reach maturity, at which point
the growth rate is going to be relatively low
and is going to converge to some kind of average
for the same type of firms, perhaps average for the sector.
Now, let's consider an example.
Northern Company is expected to pay $1 per share in dividends
next year.
This number is expected to grow at a 10% rate for the next 5
years.
After that, the growth rate of the company
is going to slow down.
And it's going to be 2% from that point on, forever.
The cost of capital of this company,
or the discount rate on its cash flows, is 8%.
The question is, what is the current share
price of the Northern Company?
The following table projects dividends per share
for this firm over the next several years.
You can see that at time 1, the dividend is expected to be $1.
And this is going to grow at a 10% rate.
So it's going to be 1.1 in year 2, 1.21 in the year 3,
and so forth, until we hit year 6.
And after that, the growth rate is going to slow down to 2%.
We are going to value this stock by dividing
the timeline into two portions.
The first segment is going to be from year 0 up to
and including year 6.
The second segment is going to start in year 7
and go all the way to infinity.
We are going to price these two portions of cash flow
separately.
So let's start with the residual piece, which
is D7, D8, and so forth.
We are going to compute the price of this residual segment
from the point of view of time 6.
From the perspective of time 6, what we're dealing with
is a Gordon model.
The growth rate of the company starting from P at 7
is constant.
We can therefore apply the Gordon formula.
The price of the stock at time 6 is
equal to D7, the expected cash flow at time 7, which
is 1.64 divided by r, the discount rate, minus g,
the growth rate, which at that point is 2%.
So 1.64 divided by 8% minus 2% is $27.38.
That is the residual value of the stock at time 6, P6.
Now, we can use our DCF formula at time 0.
The price of the stock at time 0 is equal to the sum,
from 1 to 6, of the dividends discounted
at the 8% rate, which is the expected return,
plus the residual term P6 discounted
at the same 8% rate over 6 years.
When we compute the sum, the end result is $23.07.
And that is the value of the firm
under this two-stage growth assumption.