
PROFESSOR: We now apply our discounted cash flow formula
to develop a canonical relation model for stocks.
This is the Gordon model.
The Gordon model is also known as the constant growth model.
And it's based on two key assumptions.
First, we assume that the discount rate, or the expected
return on the stock, is constant across periods.
Second, we assume that the growth rate of dividends,
in expectation, is constant as well.
Dividends grow at the average rate
equal to g, which exceeds the discount rate r.
They grow at the same rate in perpetuity.
With these two assumptions, we can
derive the value of the firm at time 0
over the price of the stock in relation
to the initial dividends.
If we substitute into our discounted cash flow
formula the relation between dividends across time, where
a dividend at time t plus 1 is expected
to be equal to the dividend at time t times 1
plus the growth rate, we can see that we are dealing
with a growing perpetuity.
And the value, the present value of this growing perpetuity,
is equal to the expected cash flow at time 1,
D1, divided by r, the discount rate, minus g, the growth rate.
This is the Gordon model.
P0, the price of the stock, is equal to D1
divided by r minus g.
Let's look at an example.
Suppose that the current dividend on the stock is 1.
This is D0 equal to $1.
We expect dividends to grow at a 6% rate per year forever.
So g is equal to 6%.
The expected return on this stock is 20%.
So r is 0.2.
In this case, the dividend at time 1, D1,
is expected to be equal to 1, initial dividend, times 1
plus the growth rate.
So that's $1.06.
And the price of the stock is therefore
$1.06 divided by the difference between the expected return
and the growth rate, which is 0.2 minus 0.06,
which gives us $7.57.
We can use this formula as a relation between prices
of securities, their expected dividends, expected returns,
and growth rates of dividends.
The Gordon model, the constant growth model,
relates the price dividend ratio to expected returns and growth
rates.
We can apply it in various ways.
For example, we can look at market prices
and infer what the market expects future returns to be
or what the projected growth rates for dividends are.
As an example, let's consider a situation
where we're using valuation ratios to forecast future stock
returns.
Northern company is a utility firm.
Its dividends are going to grow, in expectation,
at a constant rate forever.
A utility firm, being a stable business,
is a good candidate for applying this kind of constant growth
model.
The current dividend price ratio,
which is also called dividend yield, D0 over P0,
is equal to 4%.
Analysts are forecasting the long run growth of dividends
to be 5% per year.
Based on the Gordon model, we can express the expected stock
return in terms of the ratio of D1 to P0 and the growth rate.
Specifically, expected stock return
is equal to D1 over P0 plus g, the growth rate of dividends.
Because D1 is proportional to D0,
we can replace D1 with D0 times 1 plus g, the growth rate.
As a result, we can compute the expected return on the stock.
It's equal to 1.05 times the dividend yield
of 4% plus the 5% growth rate.
It's 9.2%.

One thing to note is the relation
between expected returns, and dividend yield,
and dividend growth.
What we see is that the expected return on the stock
is based on the growth rate of dividends and the dividend
yield.
In the second example, we are going
to forecast firm growth rate.
The company here is Kendall Square Cuisine.
It's a new health food franchise.
For those of you who don't know, MIT
is located in Kendall Square.
This company owns 10 restaurants as of now.
And each of these restaurants is expected to generate $1 million
in profits every year forever, in perpetuity.
This company, KSC, is expected to grow its market
share over time by opening new restaurants.
We are going to assume that it's going
to grow at a constant rate which is not known.
Each new restaurant is going to be just
like the old restaurants.
They're going to generate $1 million in profits every year
forever.
We're assuming that when the company opens a new restaurant,
the cash flows start the following year.
So if it were to open the restaurant this year,
the first cash flow is going to arrive a year later.
KSC is a publicly traded firm.
And its current market capitalization is $200 million.
We are assuming that the discount
rate, the expected return on its stock, is 10% per year.
And that will remain constant forever.
The question is, at what rate does the market
expect KSC to grow in terms of growing
its number of restaurants over time?
For our company, this means that the growth rate
g is equal to 0.1, which is the expected return,
minus the total dividend next year, which is $10 million--
remember that the company currently owns 10 restaurants,
and each of them is going to generate $1 million next year--
divided by the initial price, $200 million.
The end result is that the expected growth
rate, which is priced into the value of the firm, is 5%.
In other words, based on the current valuation
of this company, the market must be expecting the growth
at the rate of 5%.
So each year, the company is going
to increase its number of restaurants by 5%.