PROFESSOR: In this class, we're going
to talk about financial statement analysis.
Financial statement analysis, which
is also known as ratio analysis, has many different uses.
One that we all care about is it's
used to evaluate managers and determine their compensation.
So for example, a manager might be
paid based on his or her ability to maximize return on equity.
And if you haven't been compensated based on a ratio
yet, in your next job, you probably will.
A second purpose that we'll see in just a second
is just to help us compare firms of different sizes.
The third purpose as we'll also see in a few minutes
is to generate quick measures of firm health or performance.
So is this firm likely to pay us if we issue debt to them?
So we'll have a quick measure like a current ratio
to see that.
More complicated, we're going to use it
for valuation analysis and the kind of valuation analysis
that's involved in making acquisitions.
So when you go on to take further finance courses,
you'll do valuation analysis.
And many of these ratios will be inputs
of that valuation analysis.
Finally, it can be used as a basis of trading rules.
So recently, we saw the accrual anomaly.
So short stocks that have high accruals.
Buy stocks that have low accruals.
There are other trading rules that are based on ratios.
So many different purposes for ratio analysis
or financial statement analysis.
We're going to do a big example in this class.
And we're going to compare Amazon and Walmart.
So both of these are big, successful companies.
Both of these are broadly engaged in retail sales.
But historically, they've taken different strategies.
Amazon began as an online retailer.
But as we talked about recently, Amazon has bought Whole Foods.
And Amazon is moving into physical stores.
So it's got a bricks and mortar presence.
Walmart, on the other hand, began in physical stores.
There are Walmarts all around the country.
But now it's trying to move online and compete with Amazon.
In our example, we'll see that Amazon
has a lower return on equity, which
we'll use the acronym ROE for.
So Amazon has a lower ROE than Walmart.
And part of what we're going to do in our example today
is explore why.
And just note we'll always give you definitions of ratios.
So return on equity for our discussion today
is equal to net income divided by ending stockholders' equity.
