PROFESSOR: In this session, we're
going to talk about accounting for income taxes.
Our objectives are threefold.
First of all, we're going to try to understand
how financial statements reflect taxes paid and taxes owed.
And secondly, and importantly, we're
going to view firms' income tax disclosures
and their footnotes, and interpret those.
And then finally, we're going to look at a couple of events
that affect income taxes.
First of all is tax law changes, second of all
is valuation allowances.
So as motivation, or to provide a big picture overview,
remember that taxes are a significant use of cash,
both for companies, for firms, and for individuals.
Your economics course talks about one way of maximizing
profits is to minimize costs.
And taxes are a big cash cost.
So if you're running a firm or as an individual,
you want to understand the impact of income taxes
on your decisions.
First of all, if you buy an asset or you sell an asset.
So those of you that have invested in stocks, there's
tax smart ways to invest in stocks, to buy them,
and to sell them.
And there are other ways that are not as tax efficient.
Second is financing decisions.
Traditionally, interest on debt has been tax deductible,
whereas dividends on stock are not tax deductible.
So for financing, debt naturally has a tax preference.
So it's more advantageous to finance with debt.
Finally, location decisions.
As many of you remember, Amazon started a bidding war
for their corporate headquarters.
And they basically were going to put
their corporate headquarters in the locality,
among other things, that gave them the most advantageous tax
treatment.
So you can do the same thing when you're running your firm.
Finally, as an investor-- and this is our focus here--
you want to read the financial statements
and understand future cash flows.
So future cash flows is what you use to value the firm.
And some of those future cash flows,
a lot of those future cash flows, are related to tax,
and you want to understand those.
So there's accounting income or book income.
That's what we've been studying in this course.
Today we're going to talk about taxable income.
So they are two different things,
and we're just going to give you an intuition based
on marketable securities.
So remember our example before, Eva corporation buys 100 Attila
bonds.
The price of those bonds goes up by $10.
Eva does not sell the bonds.
And then Eva is using trading securities
accounting on those bonds.
And in this example, we're going to assume a tax rate of 35%.

So based on GAAP, based on accounting income,
how much is Eva's accounting income?
Well she has 100 bonds, they go up by $10.
So 10 times 100, her book income, or accounting income,
is $1,000.
What's her tax expense?
Well the tax rate is 35%.
So 35% of $1,000, tax expense is $350.
Now let's think about taxable income.
So based on the US tax code, or the Internal Revenue
Service, IRS, what's Eva's taxable income?
Well from the perspective of the tax authority,
nothing's happened.
While the bonds have gone up in value,
the tax authority only taxes income when it appears in cash.
So what's her current tax payable?
Well she has no income.
35% of 0 is 0, so she's got no tax payable.
Notice now that there's a $350 difference between tax expense
and current tax payable.
We'll see in a few minutes, this is
what's called a deferred tax liability.
So our financial reports record a liability for $350.
And this is to reflect the fact that we expect that we're
going to have to pay tax when ultimately we sell the bonds,
and we ultimately make this $1,000 gain.
So in general, there's a difference
between accounting income and taxable income.
So companies, in general, do two types of accounting.
One is accounting income.
We've been talking about that, that's
for reporting to shareholders and other stakeholders.
And the second is taxable income,
which is for reporting to tax authorities.
So financial reporting reports investors
and other stakeholders.
That's the accounting and book income
that we've been studying in this class.
And as we've been talking about throughout the class,
that uses accrual accounting, so that's going to make estimates.
Taxable income or tax or returns, on the other hand,
report to the tax authorities.
Tax authorities like taxable income,
and taxable income, as a prior example shows,
is more like cash accounting.
So remember from earlier in the course,
we talked about the trade off between relevance
and reliability.
Financial reporting likes relevant income.
So they want timely income that gets
to investors and other stakeholders
in a timely fashion.
So accounting income is relevant.
Tax returns, on the other hand, the tax authorities
want something that's not going to be disputed a lot.
So when cash comes in, everybody can agree that cash comes in.
So cash accounting, as we talked about before, which
is much like tax accounting, is more reliable.
So the tax authorities choose the more reliable method
of reporting.
Now if you forget everything else from this session,
remember this.
This is a summary about what we've been talking about.
In general, accounting income or book income,
or the income that we've been studying,
is going to be different than taxable income.
We're going to do a lot of examples of this.
Because accounting income, in general,
is going to be different than taxable income,
tax expense on our financial reporting books
is going to be different than cash taxes
that we report to the tax authorities.
So as an aside, many of us are doing our taxes right now.
Remember that we pay cash in taxes to the US,
and to the extent that we have taxes withheld,
we're paying cash as we owe it to the government.
But then when we file our returns on April 15, or July
15, or whatever the date may be, we may owe a little bit more
to the IRS because we've been under withheld.
So some of this cash is going to be paid a few months later.
But we're going to think about taxes as a cash item,
even though there will be some little bit of delays
sometimes in paying taxes.
So again, the important point is that tax expense is not
equal to cash taxes.
Tax expense, on the income statement,
is an accrual number, just like every other expense
on the income statement.
An accrual, again, is an estimate of future cash flows.
And we're going to match that accrual to income
when it's earned.
But again, the key point is, keep in mind
that in general, accounting income is not the same thing
as taxable income.