
TEACHER: So let's see how this plays out
in Goldman Sachs' income tax disclosure footnote in 2016.
So like a lot of companies--
remember deferred tax assets are going
to be on the asset side of your balance sheet as an asset.
Deferred tax liabilities are going
to be on the liability side on your balance sheet
as a liability.
But a lot of companies in their tax footnotes
will show you assets first.
So that's the first 2/3 of this table.
It shows you that Goldman has--
excuse me Goldman has deferred tax assets of $5.2 billion.
And they're going to subtract off their deferred tax
liabilities, which is approximately $1.5 billion
and they show a net deferred tax asset of $3.7 billion.
So that's an sort of overview of how to interpret the table.
And then each of these assets and liabilities
will tell you what types of transactions
are giving rise to the deferred tax assets
or are giving rise to the deferred tax liabilities.
So as I showed you a minute ago we've
got depreciation and amortization here
and the intuition for this account
is just that what we saw before.
Because we're doing straight line depreciation
for a book and accelerated depreciation for tax,
we're going to have a liability for future taxes paid
because we sort of deducted more depreciation
in the early years.
And that Goldman is showing you that they've got a $1.2 billion
liability for future tax payments related
to depreciation and amortization.
And then compensation and benefits,
there's a $2.5 billion deferred tax asset associated
with compensation and benefits.
And I'll show you a slide on this in just a second,
but the intuition is for financial reporting purposes,
we're going to expense deferred compensation when we grant it
to an employee, but it's only going
to be tax deductible when the employee ultimately
receives it.
So here's a little bit of intuition for this,
which is our deferred compensation deferred tax
asset.
This is a very simplified example.
So and it sort of works well with investment banking
nowadays.
So remember with investment banking
it used to be that we would give an employee a million
dollar bonus and then he or she would just take that bonus away
in cash.
Now for regulatory purposes lots of places
have a mandatory deferral on the bonus.
So that mandatory deferral means that even though the employees
earn the bonus in year one, the employee will not actually
get the cash for another three years
assuming that he or she stays with the company
and there's no kind of fraud revealed afterwards.
So we see in the table here years one, two, and three, when
the employee earns a bonus in year one
the firm gets no tax deduction, but it does take an accounting
expense of a million dollars.
We have a tax versus book difference minus $1 million.
And this book difference creates a deferred tax asset
of $300,000.
Nothing really happens in year two.
In year three the employee now can take the bonus in cash.
At that point, the firm gets a tax deduction
of a million dollars.
There's no further accounting expense.
So the book tax difference reverses at that point.
The deferred tax asset goes away.
So our balance sheet equation in year three.
We are going to get a $1 million tax deduction
at a 30% rate that's going to give us $300,000 in cash coming
from the government and at that point
the deferred tax asset will go away.
So looking again at the deferred tax liability
disclosures of Goldman Sachs.
Here we have depreciation and amortization.
So all I've done is of the earlier table
I showed you we're just blowing this up
and we're looking specifically at depreciation
and amortization.
So we see that we got $1.2 billion deferred tax
liability associated with depreciation and amortization.
What this is telling us is that to date tax depreciation
is higher than GAAP depreciation.
Therefore, total taxable income to date
is lower than total GAAP income.
In the future when this difference reverses
Goldman will pay more tax.
So how much higher is total tax depreciation
than GAAP depreciation?
Again, assuming a 35% rate.
So if we take the total deferred tax liability divide that
by the 35% rate that tells us that over the life of the firm,
tax depreciation has been higher than GAAP depreciation
by about $3.4 billion.
Now let's look at the summary of this table, which
is deferred tax assets of $5.2 billion
minus deferred tax liabilities of about a billion and a half.
We've got net deferred tax assets as of 2016
of $3.7 billion.
So in the future based on this, how much higher
will GAAP total income be than total taxable income be?
Again, assuming a 35% rate.
So if we take the net deferred tax assets of $3.7 billion
divide that by a 35% rate that's telling us
that in the future total GAAP income will be $10 billion.
$10.5 billion higher than total taxable income.

So then the question is, what would happen if the tax
rate went from 35% to 21%?
So that our total deferred tax assets, net deferred tax
assets, would be, again, the income
difference a $10.5 billion.
But now valued at a 21% rate.
So it be a $2.2 billion deferred tax asset.
So I'm just repeating that question here.
So what will our net deferred tax assets
be if a 21% rate were assumed instead.
So they would be $2.2 billion, which
would be a reduction of $1.5 billion from the $3.7 billion
that we show in the table right now.
Now just to push this example a little bit further.
What would the income effect be on Goldman Sachs as of 12 2016
if the tax rate were reduced from 35% to 21%?
So just looking at this in the balance sheet equation entry.
Remember, our deferred tax asset is now
worth a billion five less and so to balance the balance sheet
equation.
We're getting no cash here.
To balance the balance sheet equation,
we're going to have an additional billion five
of tax expense.
So if you have deferred tax assets and the tax rate
goes down that's bad for you because that's
going to cause your income to be lower in this amount
by $1.5 billion.