
PROFESSOR: So now we're going to talk about the effective tax
rate.
And the definition is at the top of the slide.
So the effective tax rate is tax expense
divided by GAAP pre-tax income.
And this is something that's very controversial, as we'll
see later in this section, because often companies
are going to have a lower effective tax
rate than the GAAP's statutory rate.
And people in the press and other activists
will complain that that's a sign that the firm is
paying too less in taxes.
So the effective tax rate can differ
from the US statutory rate, which was 35% in 2017.
And examples of why are permanent differences, which
are things that are recognized by GAAP but not by the tax
code.
So if you've ever bought a tax exempt bond,
you'll get interest income on those bonds,
but that interest income will not
be taxable by the US tax authority.
So there will be a difference between your interest
income for your financial reporting books
and your interest income for your tax books.
Another example is if you are caught doing something
like Goldman did.
Goldman was accused of mortgage securities fraud.
They paid a $10 billion fine to the government.
And it doesn't make sense, when you think about it,
for the government to allow fines to the government
to be tax deductible.
So fines to the government, if you
have to pay a fine to the government,
it's not tax deductible.
But it is an expense on your financial reporting books.
So that's again, another reason for why
your financial reporting income, in this case,
will be different than your taxable income.
Another big reason is historically
US multinationals have paid lower taxes when they make
investments outside the US.
And those lower tax rates cause differences
in the effective tax rate.
And then, as we just talked about,
when their tax rate changes, this
is going to cause a revaluation of our deferred tax assets
or our deferred tax liabilities that could cause extra expense
or extra income, but that's not going
to be reflected on our tax books.
And then finally, we'll do an example
towards the end of the session of stock compensation,
as something that gives rise to permanent differences
and differences in the effective tax rate.
So when we look back at Goldman, this
is Goldman's income statement for 2016.
If we compute their effective tax rate,
we take their provision for taxes of $2.9 billion
and divide that by their pre-tax income of $10.3 billion,
we get an effective tax rate of 28%,
versus the US statutory rate of 35%.
So all companies will have a chart in their income tax
footnote that looks like this, where at the top of it,
it will show the US statutory rate, which was 35% in 2016.
At the bottom, it will show the effective tax rate that we just
computed on the slide.
And in the middle of the table, it
will show you reasons why the effective tax
rate is different than the US federal statutory rate.
So in Goldman's case, there was about a 7% lower tax
rate, because Goldman had foreign earnings or non US
earnings, and these non US earnings
were taxed at a lower rate than the US tax rate.
Second thing is I mentioned a minute ago,
in 2015 Goldman paid a big fine.
But that fine, although it was an expense for book purposes,
it was not deductible for tax purposes.
So that caused a big 10.2% difference in the effective tax
rate in 2015.
Now just as a reminder, this is sort
of setting up our discussions coming up, in 2018,
the US cut the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%.
And then this chart gives you a sense of the rates
at of other major countries that the US trades with.
So the 21% rate is a little lower than France, Australia,
and other countries.
But it's higher than say like the UK and Germany
and other countries.
So the rate is arguably about in the middle of the rates of non
US countries.
And so this was a big corporate tax
change that was enacted in December of 2017.
And again, the headline result was
it lowered the US corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%,
beginning in 2018.
But there were offsets.
And one of the big offsets is that previously
earned foreign income.
So if Goldman had income in say Europe or something like that,
and that income was taxable at a lower rate,
under the old tax system, Goldman
would not pay US tax on that foreign income
until it brought that income back
to the US, which is called repatriation.
And what Goldman and other firms would do
was just never repatriate that income.
So their income tax on that non US income
was permanently lower than the income tax
they would pay in the US.
But the new tax law said that income is deemed repatriated,
which means we're going to assume that it was brought back
into the US, and it is immediately taxable at US tax
rates.
So now we're just going to scroll forward a year.
So we've been looking at Goldman Sachs's income tax
footnote for 2016.
Now we're going to look at it 2017.
Look at their effective tax rate in 2017.
It's 62%.
So it more than doubles from 2016 to 2017.
And then it's interesting to see why that is.
Well a big part is just what we talked about a minute ago.
Goldman had all this income in non US countries.
All that income was deemed repatriated and taxable.
So all the years that Goldman had
paid lower taxes in non US countries,
that just immediately reversed.
And that had a big 30% increase in their effective tax rate
as a result of that.
Other big thing that happened, and this
is what we were talking about a couple of minutes ago,
is Goldman had a net deferred tax asset.
The rate went from 35% to 21%.
That caused that net deferred tax asset to decrease in value.
And that caused Goldman's income tax expense to increase,
as we just illustrated.