
PROFESSOR: Now we want to shift gears a little bit
and talk about net operating losses, which
I'm going to use the acronym NOLs, and deferred tax assets.
We're going to do this in an example.
So if a company incurs a loss for tax purposes,
it doesn't get to pay negative tax.
So if you're an individual or if you're a company,
and you have a $100,000 loss, for example,
the government's not going to pay you a refund of $21,000
or whatever the tax rate is times your loss, OK?
Instead, what you have to do is wait,
carry that loss forward, and then to the extent
that you have future taxable income in the future,
you can lower that future taxable income
and then get your so-called deduction at that point.
So as we'll see in a second, net operating loss carryforwards
or loss carryforwards are going to create a deferred tax asset,
OK?
Because of the fact that if we have a net operating loss
carryforward, it's telling us that we're
going to pay less cash taxes in the future.
So let's just see this in a quick example.
So this XYZ company, it has financial reporting income,
or book income, and it has taxable income
of minus $100,000 in 2015, OK?
It's going to carry this tax loss forward.
Its tax rate in this example is 30%.
So our income for financial reporting purposes,
where we have a minus $100,000 worth of income,
multiply that by a 30% tax rate, and that gives us
a tax benefit of $30,000.
Now for tax reporting purposes, we have $100,000 loss.
But again, the tax authority is not
going to give us a refund for this loss,
so our cash taxes this year are zero.
So then looking at this in the balance sheet equation entry,
cash taxes are zero.
We've got a tax benefit of $30,000,
so we're going to create a deferred tax asset of $30,000.
Now, there's a couple of things that can happen here.
So one thing that can happen here
is we're going to be again profitable in the future.
So let's look at the example when
we're again profitable in the future in 2016.
So just for simplicity, let's pretend that in 2016
instead of having a loss of $100,000, as we did in, 2015
and in this year we have profits of $100,000.
So for financial reporting purposes,
we got profits of $100,000, and we'll
have tax expense of 30% of that, or $30,000.
Now, for tax reporting purposes, we've got $100,000 in income,
but we have that loss from last year, which
is that $100,000 in red there.
So income of $100,000 minus a tax loss
carried forward of $100,000, that gives us tax reporting
income this year of 0.
So looking at it in the context of the balance sheet equation,
we paid no cash taxes we've got tax expense of $30,000,
and then our deferred tax asset associated
with this net operating loss carryforward
is going to go away at this point.
So that's sort of the good outcome, which is
we have income in the future.
Now, when do you think about it, if we have a $100,000 loss one
year, do you expect future profits
to be high in the coming years?
Probably not, unless there is something extraordinary
about that loss.
Losses tend to persist.
So once we have the $100,000 loss in one year,
we kind of expect maybe to have $100,000 loss the next year.
And so that brings up the issue of the valuation allowance
associated with deferred tax assets.
So again, deferred tax assets arise
when we think that future taxes payable
are going to be less than future tax expense, as in the example
we did a little bit ago, and as with net operating loss
carryforwards.
So
As we talked about earlier, deferred tax assets
are sort of like prepaid assets.
We in some sense have paid too much tax in the past,
so we're going to pay less tax in the future.
But the issue is, what happens if those losses persist and we
don't actually expect high future income?
So if there's not going to be income in the future
to use the deferred tax asset, then the deferred tax asset's
not going to be realizable.
And if it's not realizable, we're
going to need to reduce that.
It's kind of like accounts receivable.
So we got some accounts receivable,
but we don't expect to collect it.
And we're going to reduce those deferred tax
assets by creating a valuation allowance, which is a contra
asset, and it's very similar to the contra asset
that we create for the allowance for doubtful accounts.
So going back to our deferred tax asset example,
so we have this $30,000 deferred tax asset.
And let's pretend that instead of getting $100,000 of income
in 2016, management does a forecast
and it expects that we're actually not going
to have any future income, or certainly not
enough future income to use the deferred tax asset.
So in that case, we're going to create this valuation
allowance, which is a contra asset,
and we're going to reduce the value of the deferred tax asset
by offsetting it with this valuation allowance.
And then to balance the balance sheet equation,
so if we create a valuation allowance,
that's going to mean additional tax expense.
And so again, the valuation allowance,
which is this contra asset, is similar to the allowance
for doubtful accounts.
So we create an allowance for doubtful accounts,
and that creates in terms of extra expense,
in terms of bad debt expense.
If we look at Goldman's footnote, again from 2016,
we see Goldman's has $427 million
in net operating losses.
Goldman has set up a valuation allowance for $115 million
of those NOLs.
And when you think about it, Goldman
is a highly profitable company.
Why would it be setting up valuation allowances for some
of their deferred tax assets?
And this is a little subtle, but remember,
Goldman operates around the world.
It operates in all 50 US states.
And it may be that it had a loss in say some state,
but because it never expects to have operations in that state
again, it's not going to have income in those states,
so that net operating loss carryforward in that state
or in that locality or in that country,
it's never going to be able to use it,
because it's not going to go back into that country
and earn income.
So that's intuition for why even an extremely profitable company
like Goldman might have some of a valuation
allowance associated with some of its deferred tax assets.
Now, this is a famous example.
This goes back to 2009 when Citigroup--
it alarmed a lot of the big US banks.
It was the time of the financial crisis.
And Citigroup, there were some concerns
that Citigroup was actually not going
to survive the financial crisis.
So this is a CNBC.com article from October of 2009,
and it talks about Citigroup might
have to write down about $10 billion
of deferred tax assets in the fourth quarter
according to banking analyst Michael Mayo.
And this news sent the shares down over 5%.
So this is accrual accounting.
And you kind of wonder, why did this
cause share prices to fall?

And the hint here is, when would a firm
have to write down deferred tax assets,
or when would it not be able to use them?
So as we were talking about before,
we can only use the deferred tax asset
if our future income is going to be positive.
And when a company writes down a deferred tax asset
or creates a valuation allowance against a deferred tax asset,
the company is telling you it does not
expect high future income, so you
sort of getting bad news from the company.
And this is a rare case when the accounting system sort of tells
you that future income is going to be low.
So this is something that bothers the stock market,
because the accounting system and management is basically
saying, when this deferred tax asset is written down,
it's telling you that future income is
expected to be very low.
So deferred tax assets can only be
used to offset taxable gains, but if we
don't have taxable gains in the future,
the value of these deferred tax assets need to be written down.