PROFESSOR: Now this is not on the exam,
but this is an interesting piece of accounting.
Now instead of looking at deferred compensation
deferred tax assets, we're going to look at a stock compensation
deferred tax asset.
So again, this is a simplified example.
But let's just imagine we've given an employee
stock or options, whose expected value is $1 million.
But they have to wait for three years
to get the value of the stock or options.
And then let's imagine that during the waiting period,
the value of that stock went from $1,000 to $10,000,
or $1 million to $10 million.
So that the accounting for this is, again, at the time
that we make the grant, there's no tax deduction.
Nothing has happened from the tax authority's perspective.
The grant value was $1 million.
So we got an accounting expense of $1 million.
Our book versus tax difference is $1 million,
so our deferred tax asset associated with this
is $300,000.
So this is just like the deferred compensation example
that we just did.
Now later on, three years from now,
it turns out that the stock is worth $10 million.
When the employee gets the stock, he or she is taxable,
and the firm gets a $10 million tax deduction.
We have no further accounting expense.
Now, the tax versus book difference is $10 million.
The deferred tax asset vanishes.
So before 2017, the accounting for this
was the company gets a $10 million tax deduction.
So that's going to be worth $3 million in cash to the company.
So it gets $3 million extra cash.
The deferred tax asset goes away.
And then to balance the balance sheet equation,
we're going to put the difference
into contributed capital.
So $2.7 million.
Notice that here, because it's being
put into contributed capital, this has no income effect.
Now for whatever reason, the accounting authorities
decided to change this.
And they changed it, instead of putting the difference
at $2.7 million into contributed capital, now
you're putting it into retained earnings.
So this is a tax benefit, or reduction in tax expense.
So this is going to show up in income.
So this is just an accounting change.
So nothing happened in terms of the economics.
It used to go into contributed capital with no income effect,
now it's going to go into retained earnings.
It's going to increase income by $2.7 million.
So activists in the press, they look at these effective tax
rates.
So Amazon has a very low effective tax rate,
and then Joe Biden is doing the typical politician thing
and saying, Amazon, their effective tax
rate, they're paying less taxes than fire people or plumbers,
or something like that, which is a nonsensical statement.
And then Amazon comes back and says,
we paid every bit of taxes that we've owed.
We've also created a tremendous number of jobs.
But what Biden was talking about is Amazon's tax footnote.
This is a reconciliation of the US statutory rate
to the effective tax rate.
And then notice in 2016, Amazon's effective tax rate
was 36%, when the statutory tax rate was 35%.
Same thing is true in 2017.
Detached statutory tax rate is 35%,
Amazon's effective tax rate drops to 20%.
But almost all of this drop was because
of the screwy accounting I talked to you
about with stock compensation.
So before, in 2016, stock compensation
increased the effective tax rate by 5%.
But because now these excess deductions
are being flowed through into retained earnings
and into income, in 2017 the effective tax rate
goes down by 25% almost, because of stock compensation.
So this is nothing to do with the economics of the taxes
that Amazon is paying, but something
to do with how they're being accounted for.
Not to say, though, that big companies do not
try to pay as little taxes as possible, just
like individuals do.
The difference with big companies like Apple
is they have a tremendous amount of resources,
and a tremendous amount of incentives to pay low taxes.
So Apple's tax department is a great tax department,
and they figure out how we can pay the least amount of taxes
possible.
So this Wall Street Journal article
says that Apple, and other tech companies like Apple,
are world class innovators in tax avoidance.
And then a later New York Times article talks about one way
that Apple does this.
So their headquarters are in California.
California has about a 9% corporate tax rate.
Nevada is just right next to California,
especially where Apple is.
So Apple puts in a collection office space in Nevada.
It recognizes all its state income in Nevada,
rather than California.
And they drop that tax rate from 9% in California
to 0 in Nevada.
So taxes are interesting and important.
We talked about how financial statements reflect taxes paid
and taxes owed.
We spent a lot of time looking at income tax disclosures.
And the reason this is important,
again, for you all as investors, is because taxes have big cash
effects, and you want to have some ability
to forecast cash taxes.
And then the final thing we talked
about was the effect of advance on income taxes.
We talked about the tax law changes.
Remember, the tax law just changed in 2018.
You might think that's old news, but if the government changes
in the US this fall, in 2020, if we get a Democratic president,
many of these tax law changes are going to be reversed.
So instead of the tax rate going down for corporations,
we might expect the tax rate would go up for corporations.
So now you have a framework to think
about what will happen to financial statements
if that's true.
And then we also talked about net operating loss
carryforwards, and the associated valuation
allowances.
And how these valuation allowances
tell you something about future income for companies.
