PROFESSOR: So here's comparative balance sheets
for Walmart and Amazon in 2016.
If you look at the bottom here, you
can see that Walmart has total assets of about $200 billion.
Amazon has about half that at $83 billion.
So these differences in sizes make them difficult to compare.
So what we'll do is to compute a common size balance sheet.
And we'll just divide all the balance
sheet numbers of Walmart by their total assets
of $199 billion.
And we're going to divide all the asset amounts of Amazon
by their total assets of $83 billion.
And then, once we've common sized these, you can see,
from the columns that have percentages on them,
Amazon has a lot more cash than does Walmart.
We talked a little bit about that last time
that Amazon is saving cash, maybe for an acquisition.
Amazon has more receivables.
Walmart, on the other hand, has much more inventory
as a percentage of its balance sheet than does Amazon.
And one intuition for this is that Walmart
has all these physical stores spread around the country.
All those stores have inventory, whereas Amazon
has a few shipping centers spread around the country.
So Amazon can carry less inventory.
The same intuition applies to property, plant, and equipment.
Walmart has all these physical stores.
It has more property, plant, and equipment.
So, again, the common size balance sheet sort of
helps us to compare these two companies apples to apples.
Now, here's a common size balance sheet
where we're looking at the liabilities and stockholders'
equity of Walmart and Amazon.
As you sort of scroll through this,
you can see that accounts payable for Amazon
is much larger.
Maybe Amazon is using their suppliers
as a source of financing, paying off their suppliers
more slowly.
We see that current liabilities for Amazon is much greater.
On the other hand, Walmart has more long-term debt.
Walmart also has more stockholders' equity.
As an aside, note that, at the bottom of the balance sheet,
Walmart shows non-controlling interest.
This is a form of equity we will discuss in lecture 8.
Before we start our ratio analysis
and as a review of inventory accounting,
remember that, if a firm uses LIFO or if a firm uses FIFO,
those firms are going to have big differences in income
and total assets.
And we want to make sure before we start in on this exercise
that Amazon and Walmart are in fact comparable.
So how could we get information on their inventories?
Well, we have their annual report.
We have their 10-K. Let's just open that up and then
search on the word inventories.
So, if we do that, with Amazon, we search.
We search.
We search.
We keep clicking on inventories.
And, at some point, the Amazon 10-K
will tell us that Amazon uses FIFO, or First In, First Out.
We'll do the same exercise for Walmart.
And what Walmart tells us is more complicated,
but, essentially, their inventory valuation
is the same as FIFO.
It uses LIFO for US inventories.
Remember, that makes sense because that's
permitted in the US.
And they use FIFO for international inventories.
And, again, that makes sense because FIFO
is the only thing that's permitted internationally.
The key point, though, is that, for Walmart, LIFO and FIFO
are about the same thing.
So, in doing these comparisons, we
don't have to worry about inventory differences.