
Now, our agenda for today on ratio analysis
is we're going to introduce and consider some basic ratios.
We're going to talk about why they're calculated,
who would be interested in them bankers, stockholders
suppliers, et cetera.
And we're going to also sort of review the ratios
and review the accounting by talking
about how the ratios would be affected if management,
say, paid a dividend, or if management, say, paid off
their accounts payable.
We're going to look at three types of ratios.
Broadly speaking, there's liquidity and solvency ratios.
Can you pay your bills?
So if you're going to sell to a company,
you want to make sure that that company can pay you back.
So you might look at their current ratio,
which is an example of liquidity solvency ratio.
We're going to look at profitability ratios, which is
our ability to generate profit.
So we've already seen one of those,
which is return on equity.
So how much profits per unit of equity does a manager generate?
And the third set of ratios are going
to look at our efficiency ratios.
Can the manager efficiently manage the firm's operations.
Now one note on this, I'm going to throw a lot of material
at you today, but in any kind of test,
it will always give you a definition
of the applicable ratio.
So this is not a course about memorizing
what exactly the ratio is.
And the point of the ratio will be to use--
to test your understanding of the material,
as in the LIFO-FIFO example we're
going to do in a few minutes.
So now for some liquidity solvency ratios.
And here we're looking back at Amazon's balance sheet.
And the first one is just for review from last time.
Remember, we define working capital as current assets
minus current liabilities.
So please confirm that you see these numbers on the balance
sheet.
But Amazon has current assets of $45 billion.
It's got current liabilities of $44 billion.
And its working capital is about $2 billion.
So working capital is the difference, again,
between current assets and current liabilities.
Now that's dollar amount and it's
hard to compare across companies.
So what people will often do is turn this working capital
into a ratio, which is the current ratio.
So we're going to divide current assets by current liabilities.
So we're taking the same two things, current assets
and current liabilities.
Now we're dividing them.
So Amazon's current ratio is 1.04.
Now, let's apply these ratios.
So if Amazon were to pay off all of its accounts
payable with cash, how would that
affect its working capital?
So think about the balance sheet equation.
We're going to pay off accounts payable, which is a liability.
We're going to reduce accounts payable.
We're going to reduce cash.
So as terms of working capital, there's no change.
So we're going to subtract something
off the current assets, subtract the same amount
off our current liabilities.
Now let's think about the ratio.
What would happen if we reduce current assets
by the amount of cash and we reduce current liabilities
by the same amount of cash?
So you have to think about this for a second,
but that's going to increase the ratio.
And as a helpful guideline to you, here some ratio facts.
Here's the same example done for accounts payable.
So if we pay off accounts payable
when our current ratio is 1.04, our current ratio value
in the left hand column is greater than 1.
We're subtracting something from both the numerator
and the denominator.
That's the middle column.
And then the right hand column tells us intuitively
that ratio is going to get bigger.
So obviously, you could plug the amount into your calculator
and come up with the same number.
But this is a reference for you.