PROFESSOR: So we just talked about the current ratio, which
is a short-term liquidity ratio.
Now, we're going to look at long-term liquidity ratios.
So an example of a long-term liquidity ratio
is the debt-equity ratio.
To form that ratio, we divide total liabilities divided
by total stockholders' equity.
And this is going to be associated with bankruptcy risk
because, as your stockholders' equity gets smaller and smaller
and your total liabilities get bigger and bigger, the chance
that-- if you have a big loss or something like that,
you'll wipe out your stockholders' equity.
You'll only be left with liabilities,
which means you'll be bankrupt.
This ratio can also be expressed as long-term debt
plus short-term debt, so just the debt
component of total liabilities, also divided
by stockholders' equity.
Another alternative that we're going to look at in a minute
is the leverage ratio.
And here we're going to divide total assets divided
by total stockholders' equity, but just noticing in the red
there that assets are equal to liabilities plus equity.
The leverage ratio is just 1 plus the debt-to-equity ratio.
So other examples of solvency and liquidity ratios
that are widely used, first one is something called
times interest earned where we take Earnings
Before Interest and Taxes, or EBIT, and divide it
by interest expense.
The intuition here is, do you have a lot of profitability
to cover your interest expense?
So, as your profitability get smaller,
your ability to pay interest gets smaller as well.
So you're more likely to go bankrupt.
And then this is a little bit out of the scope of our class.
So this is not on the exam, but I
want to tell you about Altman's 1968 Z-score, which is
a bankruptcy prediction model.
So the Z-score is a combination of five financial statement
ratios.
So we've got working capital to total assets, which
is kind of the current ratio we just talked about.
We've got retained earnings to total assets, which
is kind of a leverage ratio.
So how much retained earnings do we have to total assets?
We've got EBIT, or earnings before interest and taxes,
to total assets, which is how profitable we
are per unit of total assets.
The fourth ratio is market value of total equity
divided by total liabilities.
So that's a market leverage ratio.
And then the final one is sales to total assets.
And that's a turnover ratio that we'll be
talking about in just a second.
And so what Altman did was run regressions
with these five inputs.
And he found that a weighted combination of these things
was a score.
And this Z-score, when it becomes lower and lower,
tells you that there's a much higher probability
of bankruptcy.
So this is something that you'll see
in your advanced financial statement class,
but I wanted to mention it here now.
Again, it's not going to be on our exam.
Coming back to the debt-equity ratio,
please confirm that you can find these numbers
in the financial statements that we discussed earlier.
Walmart's debt-equity ratio is 1.48.
Amazon's debt-equity ratio is 3.32.
You can see the red numbers are the balance sheet
information that we're using to compute the ratios.
Walmart's leverage ratio is 2.48,
whereas Amazon's leverage ratio is 4.32.
And, again, notice that the leverage ratio for Amazon,
for example, is exactly 1 greater than Amazon's
debt-equity ratio.
So it's another way of expressing
the same concept, which is how much leverage you have.
So, to wrap this up, let's do a review problem.
Amazon's debt-equity ratio is, again, 3.32.
And we're taking $64 billion divided by $19 billion
to get that 3.32.
And then let's think.
Would this ratio increase, decrease, or remain unchanged
if management took the following actions in 2016?
So if it pays more dividends in 2016--
so, if we pay more dividends, does that
have an effect on liabilities?
No.
What does it do to stockholders' equity?
It's going to lower it.
So, therefore, our debt-equity ratio
would increase because the denominator
is becoming smaller.
What would happen if we recorded more bad debt expense in 2016?
Does that affect our liabilities?
Again, no.
Does that affect our stockholders' equity?
It lowers it.
So, by the same logic as above, our debt-equity ratio
would increase if Amazon recorded more bad debt expense.
Now, what would happen if Amazon paid off all of its accounts
payable with cash in 2016?
So that's going to lower liabilities.
So accounts payable will go away.
Will it have an effect on stockholders' equity?
No.
So liabilities go down.
That's going to decrease our debt-equity ratio.
And then, finally, suppose we issue a billion dollars
worth of long-term debt and a billion dollars worth of stock
at the very end of 2016.
So that's going to increase our liabilities.
It's going to increase our stockholders' equity.
Overall, because our ratio is bigger than 1
to start off with, that's going to decrease
our debt-equity ratio from the ratio facts
that we just talked about a minute ago.
Also, obviously, this is an easy one
to plug into your calculator.