PROFESSOR: All right.
So now we've talked about solvency ratios.
We've talked about profitability ratios.
The third class ratios we want to talk about
are efficiency ratios.
And in the middle, accounts receivable turnover revenue
divided by net accounts receivable,
remember we've seen that when we talked
about accounts receivable a couple of classes ago.
Inventory turnover, cost of goods
sold divided by inventory, we also
talked about that a couple of classes ago.
So what you basically want here is big numbers.
So how fast are you generating revenue per unit accounts
receivable?
How fast are you generating cost of goods
sold per unit of inventory?
Now, the king of these ratios is asset turnover,
which is revenue divided by total assets.
So if I give you a certain amount of total assets,
how much revenue can you generate
based on those total assets?
So this is a very common managerial performance
evaluation where, for example, in an investment firm,
I'll give you a million dollars.
And your evaluation is basically how much profit
or how much total revenue can you generate
from those total assets.
So how fast can you generate revenue per unit of assets
that I've given you?
So this is a very important ratio.
Now, just a little bit a review of inventory--
and this is inventory turnover in particular.
So let's suppose that Amazon's definition of inventory
turnover is cost of goods sold divided by ending inventory.
So they've got turnover of 7.7 times.
We already talked that Amazon uses first in, first out.
Now, if contrary to fact, they were to switch over to LIFO,
what would you think the impact on inventory turnover would be?
Would it be higher or lower under LIFO?
So let's just break it down, look at the numerator
first, which is cost of goods sold.
So if we use LIFO instead of FIFO,
under normal circumstances, what's
that going to do to our cost of goods sold?
So that's going to increase it.
So I remember from our discussions inventory,
new costs are going to flow to cost of goods sold under LIFO.
And those new costs are going to tend
to be higher if inflation is going up.
What would happen under LIFO to ending inventory?
So that's going to go down.
So the new costs are going to be sold under LIFO.
The old costs are going to end up in ending inventory.
They're going to tend to be lower.
So what's going to be the effect on our inventory turnover?
Well, the numerator is going up.
The denominator is going down.
So inventory turnover is going to increase.
Remember, we saw this last time in the example of ExxonMobil.
So the big difference is between inventory turnover
between a LIFO firm and a FIFO firm.
But to get this, we had to assume normal circumstances.
And just as a review, what are normal circumstances?
So one we just talked about, we need rising prices for this
to happen.
So as long as prices are going up,
we have normal circumstances.
The second one as review is a little bit more subtle.
Can you think of that?
Remember, we can't be selling off inventory
and bringing in old costs as a result of inventory sales.
So that's a review of the ratio and a little bit
of a review of LIFO and FIFO.

Here's the three efficiency ratios for Amazon and Walmart.
So Amazon turns their assets over slower than does
Walmart, 1.63 versus 2.42.
Their accounts receivable turnover is also slower than as
is Walmart.
And remember, when we talked about accounts receivable
turnover, a good way to think about the ratio is to flip it
and divide it into 365 days.
So that tells you that Amazon has
22 days of accounts receivable whereas Walmart only
has 4.3 days of accounts receivable.
And when I looked at these numbers,
they're sort of puzzling because you would think that Amazon
would be super efficient.
You would think that Amazon would
be collecting its accounts receivable a lot faster.
And then if you read the footnote on Amazon's accounts
receivable, there's a clue in there,
which is Amazon is lending money to some of its sellers
so that they can buy goods to sell.
So that money that Amazon is lending
is effectively in accounts receivable.
It shows up in their accounts receivable.
But those accounts receivable tend
to be collected much slower than your ordinary customer accounts
receivable.
So I think that's what's going on here.
So again, what's nice about ratio analysis,
it gives you some places to look,
and then you look into the annual report
and try to understand what the differences are.