
So remember, we've talked about leverage or solvency ratios.
We've talked about profitability ratios.
And we talked about efficiency ratio.
What's known as DuPont analysis, which was invented back
in the 20s, I think, by the DuPont corporation
is a way to sort of tie these all together
and understand why return on equity is either high or low.
So what this diagram shows, is that return on equity, which
is net income divide by stockholders' equity,
can be rewritten as net income divided
by total assets multiplied by total assets divided
by stockholders' equity so that your drivers a return on equity
or a return on assets multiplied by leverage.
But what that tells you is holding your return on assets
constant, one way you can increase your return on equity
is by increasing your leverage.
And so that's what you see banks do.
So banks have very low return on assets, probably
something like 2%.
But they have very high financial leverage
their leverage, about 10 to 1 or 20 to 1.
And that's the way the bank gets a normal 10% to 15%
return on equity through financial leverage.
A further way to decompose return on equity
is by looking at return on assets.
We can do the same type of decomposition
by multiplying and dividing by sales over sales
and then rearranging.
So we'll get a return on assets equals
net income divided by sales multiplied by sales divided
by total assets.
So the return on assets is how much profit
you have per unit of sales multiplied by how fast you
turn your assets over.
So another way of saying this is that the three drivers
a return on equity are profit margin,
how big is your profit margin, asset turnover,
how fast are you turning your assets over, and leverage,
so how much financial leverage do you have.
So when we compare Amazon, we see that their return on equity
is 12.3%.
They've got a low profit margin.
They got a low asset turnover.
But in some sense they juiced that up
by having a lot of financial leverage.
Walmart on the other hand, is a much larger return on equity,
a 5% larger return on equity.
They got a larger profit margin.
They use their assets more efficiently,
so they turn them over more efficiently.
The reason that it's not even bigger
is because their leverage is lower than is Amazon.
So those dials sort of tell us why Amazon's return on equity
is lower than Walmart's.
So they're not getting as much margin per unit of sales.
And they're not turning their assets over as fast.
But they do have more financial leverage.
And just something to think about,
if Amazon were concerned about its return
on equity, what would be an easy thing
to do if it wanted to increase its return on equity?
So remember Amazon's balance sheet
that we looked at earlier.
Amazon has lots of cash on its balance sheet.
So if Amazon paid off some of that cash,
paid it out to its stockholders as a dividend, then
that would lower equity.
And that will increase asset turnover.
And it would also increase leverage.
So it would lower equity and assets,
enabling them to increase their asset turnover
and increase their leverage.
Now that doesn't come completely free.
Remember that Amazon has that cash.
They're going to be earning interest on that cash.
So that would cause their margin to go down a little bit.
But overall, if they paid some of that cash out as a dividend,
that would cause their leverage and turnover to go up more
and cause their return on equity to go up as well.