
PROFESSOR: One common approach to solving partial differential
equations is to make an educated guess
as to the form of the correct answer and see where it leads.
Now, this is a little bit different
from the special example that we had before,
where the example appeared full blown out of thin air,
we checked that at it worked, it satisfied the equations,
and we were done.
What do we do when we face other differential equations where
we're not given an answer completely?
Well, what we do is we look for the structure.
And this is one trick that works in many cases,
but by no means all, but it does come up
in some of our recent discussions.
So I thought we'd do a couple of examples together.
One of the methods is to try a form
where we might have a simple form where
the trial function, sometimes called ansatz,
factorizes into two forms.
So for example, suppose we didn't
know about that exponential solution.
We had this equation, we noticed that it has two terms-- one's
in t, one is in z.
The coefficients are constant.
So suppose we try a function.
Let's try a function of the form p of z and t
is f of z g of t, where f and z are unknown functions,
but they're each a function of a single variable.
So our goal is to see if we can simplify things.
This is a much simpler structure.
We can get individual equations for f and g, each of which
is an ordinary differential equation, not
a partial differential equation.
And then we impose boundary conditions,
which might give us the answer right away,
or it might require taking a superposition of solutions
using linearity-- that is, to take
different solutions of the same general form
and adding them together.
So let's take a look in this particular example.
If I turn the crank, get we compute
the partial derivatives.
Partial derivative of p with respect to t
is f of z is going to be constant times derivative of g.
And the second partial derivative
of p with respect to z squared is going
to be f double prime of z--
just a second derivative of the function f--
times g of z.
So now if we plug these into our differential equation,
what do we get?
Well, we get that f times g prime
has to be equal to 1/2 f double prime times g.
And let's divide the whole thing through by fg--
by p, that is--
by fg.

If we take this, we can rewrite things in this form.
Then we have g prime of t divided by g of t is 1/2
f double prime of z divided by f of z.
So this follows just from our differential equation.
We took the original equation, we substituted
in this specific form, we get this expression,
fg prime is 1/2 f double prime g.
We divide through by f and g to simplify things.
And you notice what happens here in this expression,
I have on the left side, I have g prime over g.
They're both functions of t only.
That's why I did the division.
On the right-hand side, those are functions of z only.
So how can I have a function of t equals a function of z
for all values of t and z?
Can't really work unless they're both constant.
So we're going to do is we're going to set them both equal
to a constant.
And that will give us one differential equation for g,
another one for f, and then when we solve them,
we can multiply f and g together, and we're done.
So let's call this constant, let's say we'll give it a name.
Let's call this lambda.
And now we have two differential equations.
So I've got g prime of t is equal to lambda g of t.
That's an easy equation to solve.
That's just an exponential.
g of t is equal to some constant--
let me call c0 e to the minus lambda t.
That's our first equation for g, and we're done.
What about f?
Just as easy.
f double prime of z is going to be equal to 2--
from the 1/2 in the diffusion equation-- times lambda times
f of z.
So I've got 2 lambda instead of lambda,
and I have 2 derivatives with respect
to z instead of one derivative with respect to t,
but the equation is very similar.
And its solution is f of z has two possible terms, two
constants of integration, c1 times
e to the square root of 2 lambda t
plus c2 times e to the minus square root of 2 lambda t.
Now, if lambda were a negative number, then
this would have been sines and cosines.
Now we don't need to worry about the square root.
We would have something times sine plus something times
cosine with an arbitrary linear combination of the two.
So e0, c1, c2, they're constants of integration.
Any linear combination of the terms f of z, g of t
will satisfy the conditions.
So we can take p of z, t can be f of z g of t.
And if we have multiple such terms,
we can take a sum over them.
And that will automatically satisfy the differential
equation, and then we're done.
So let's consider an exercise.

So let's try a particular form of the solution--
in this case, a function not of t times a function of y.
But let's try something of this form, where we let v of t and y
of the form that it's the exponential of something that's
linear in y, so that we can see that it might recover this
as a special case when t goes to 0.
And where f and g are functions of time alone,
and all of the y dependence is here
in this exponential to the minus y times f and g.
So please take a moment now, try it again.
Or if that's what you've already got, hang on.
And then we'll take a look through
and what happens when we substitute this
into our equation.

OK, have you got it?
Well, what we're going to do is let's
compute partial derivatives and then substitute
into the equation and see if we can get simplified
equations for f and g.
Shall we?
So computing partial derivatives,
we have that partial of V with respect
to t in this form is going to be partial--
excuse me, it's going to be a regular derivative.
It's going to be df dt minus y dg dt acting on V.
And the reason for this is because
of the exponential form.
You remember in our diffusion example,
we divided through by e.
Here it's helpful if we have a form where everything ends up
being proportional in the different terms.
So taking derivatives with respect to time, I have this.
What about the space derivatives?
Well, I have partial of V with respect to y
is going to be minus g times V and
the second partial derivative of V with respect to y squared.
Because remember y, we're linear in the exponent.
This is going to be g squared of V. Minus g times minus g
just gives us g squared.
So now if we take these partial derivatives
and we substitute into our original differential equation,
what do we get?
We get that it's going to have V times
df dt minus y dg dt plus 1/2 sigma
squared g squared plus alpha yg is equal to 0.
Let's rewrite that.
Let's notice that we've got terms that are linear in y,
like this one and this one, and the others have no explicit
y's.
So let's group them in terms of those that are linear in y
and those that are constants.
And we can divide by V-- we're assuming that V is non-zero.
After all, we've assumed it's in exponential form.
So now we would have df dt plus 1/2 sigma squared
g squared plus y times alpha g minus dg dt.

And this has to be equal to 0.
Well, how can this be equal to 0?
It has to be equal to 0 for all t and for all y.
So the coefficient of y has to be equal to 0.
And then the constant term, this first term in parentheses,
has to be equal to 0 separately.
So now we have two equations for df dt and for dg dt.
Let's do the second one first, because this term has only g's.
This one here has a partial of f with respect to t,
and it's going to depend on the value of g.
We don't know what g is yet.
So why don't we solve g by solving
this equation, plug g in over here,
and then we can solve for f?
So these equations are pretty easy.
Let's take a look.
So taking the g equation first, we're
going to have that dg dt is going to be equal to alpha g.
And that tells us that g of t is going to be some constant
times e to the alpha t.
And now remember what our initial conditions were.
Our initial conditions said that at time 0,
the function should be e to the minus y.
That means that g of t should be equal to 1
when t is equal to 0, and f of t should be equal to 0
when t is equal to 0.
So let me just add that up here for discussion
and to remind us.
This implies f of 0 equals 0, and g of 0
has to be equal to 1.
So now let's take a look at our special form.
And we can see that that's easy.
That means that c has to be equal to 1.
So this says the g of t is just going to be e to the alpha t.
And when t is equal to 0, g is equal to 1.
And we're done.
Now, let's look at the differential equation for f.

Well, we have df dt is going to be equal to minus sigma squared
over 2g squared.
But we know what g is, we just solved for it.
So this is going to be minus sigma squared over 2 e
to the 2 alpha t, so I've just put in the explicit form of g
squared.
And if we want to solve that, that's easy also.
If the derivative of f is an exponential, then f
is an exponential.
We just need to get the constant right.
So we're going to have a constant of integration.
So this tells us that f is going to be equal to minus--
excuse me-- minus sigma squared over 4 alpha e
to the 2 alpha t plus a constant.
And then f of 0 equals 0 gives us
our final form, that f of t, that's to be equal to sigma
squared over 4 alpha times 1 minus e to the 2 alpha t.
And you can check.
When t goes to 0, this exponential goes to 1.
1 minus 1 gives 0, and f of t of 0 zero.
Now finally, we've got our solution
to the original equation.
So therefore, the solution is V of y and-- or I guess part of t
and y--

either way, we know what it is-- is
going to be the exponential of sigma squared over
4 alpha times 1 minus e to the 2 alpha t minus y times
e to the alpha t.
And that's it.
So it's an exponential with exponentials in the exponent,
but it solves our differential equation, as you can check.
You can go back to the beginning.
It has the desired form that we wanted.
And because it satisfies the appropriate boundary
conditions, we know that it's the right answer
that we were looking for.
