
PROFESSOR: Let's look a bit more about option pricing
in the presence of boundaries and barriers.
So we've seen that usually in a partial differential
equation where a derivative value is somewhat universal,
it really depends on what the underlying is
and the relationship between the risk factors and the underlying
and the derivative.
But the boundary conditions matter a lot,
and they determine what kind of option we have.
So we have vanilla options, puts and calls,
with our traditional payoffs above or below a strike price.
But there are all kinds of other options, usually called
exotic options if they're not vanilla options.
And they may depend on other conditions that
could happen in time, they could depend on the path of s,
and they might involve looking at specific events or even
their lookback options, whose value depends
on the entire past trajectory of s.
For example, it could depend on the maximum that
s during its lifetime, which would not
be known until expiration.
So let's take a look at an example here called
a trigger option.
So I'd like to assume that s is given by a usual geometric
Brownian motion.
And this trigger option gives the owner
the right, but not the obligation,
to buy the underlying stock at a strike price K
if the stock value exceeds another value called
the trigger X at expiration.
So the underlying follows the Ito process, dS over s
equals mu dt plus sigma dB.
What PDE does the option satisfy, and what's its price?
So let me give you one hint, which
is what you might want to do is sketch the option payoff.
And you could even ask, could this
be replicated by another series of contracts?
So you might consider that we're thinking
about-- the generic call option would have a payoff
function that looks like this.
A function that had a strike price at X
would have a payoff function that looks
like this if it were a call.
But this one is a little bit different.
The payoff is the payoff above K,
but only if the price exceeds X. So
take a moment to see if you can map it out and draw a picture.
And if you can solve the equation, even better.
I'll be back in just a moment.

So first, the payoff.
The payoff should-- let's draw this in red, I guess.
So the payoff is going to be 0 until we get X.
Because if we're below X, we don't get anything.
And from that point forward, the payoff
is the same we would have had here, that we would have had
for the ordinary call option.
So one way to say this is that the payoff is
equal to the payoff for ST greater than x
is going to be ST minus K, but only for ST greater than x.
Well, another way we can write that
is we can say that ST minus K is equal to ST minus X plus X
minus K. So that is to say, the first part,
ST minus X would be the payoff if the strike price
were equal to X. That is, that would be this payoff function.
But that would be a little bit too low, right?
We have an extra piece that we're missing here.
And that distance, because this has slope 1, is X minus K.
And that says that if we're below, we get nothing.
But if we're above, we get X minus K units.
Hmm, that sounds like a digital option or a binary option.
So that says that we could replicate.
So this can be replicated--

the payoff can be replicated with an option
of strike X plus X minus K binary options of strike K.
Oops, sorry.
I didn't mean to block that out.
So the solution is just going to be the sum,
and we've computed those in class.
So we can write down the Black-Scholes solution
plus the solution to the binary part.
So our answer is that the value of our derivative V
is going to be S times phi of T plus minus X
e to the minus RT times phi of d minus plus X
minus K times the solution for a binary option,
e to the minus RT phi of d minus.
I've taken little t to be equal to 0 for our current time,
and big T is the time to maturity.
And then you notice there's a small cancellation
between these two terms.
So this is equal to S phi of T plus minus K e
to the minus RT phi of t minus--
where we need to make sure that we
use a d plus and a d minus that are appropriate for the strike
price X. So where d plus minus are
equal to the log of S over X e to the minus RT divided
by sigma square root of T plus or minus 1/2 sigma squared
of T. And as usual, phi represents
the Gaussian cumulative distribution function.
Now, the lesson here is that we look
at what the payoff is, we check the boundary conditions.
And wherever possible, we use our existing solutions
to Black-Scholes to combine them in a way--
because we know that we can always
take a linear combination of solutions
to the partial differential equation
to get another solution to the partial differential equation.
What we need is to be able to match the boundary conditions.
And this equation matches the boundary conditions,
which are the specified payoff at expiration.