
Here's an exercise for a barrier option
that involves solving a differential equation using
the method of images, or reflection,
and the notion of trying to make an inspired guess for a trial
function.
Let's see if we can put it all together.
So here's the problem.
The problem is to find the value the European down-and-out call
option.
And this is an example that was given in Robert Martin's
original paper on option pricing that came out at the same time
as Black and Scholes, and he gave
this example of this option.
So it has a strike price K, it has time to expiration T,
it satisfies geometric Brownian motion,
so it has an Ito process.
dS over S is mu dt plus sigma dB with mu and sigma constant.
There's a knock-out barrier at X,
which we'll take to be below the strike price.
And the idea is that this is an option that
looks like an ordinary call option
until or unless the stock price hits the value of the barrier.
If it hits the barrier, it's done, and it becomes worthless.
Why do such things exist?
Well, they're cheaper than other options.
So there might be particular risks that it's tailored to.
There might be particular conditions where someone's
hedging a risk, and they figure under certain circumstances,
they might not need it.
But in any event, there's this option.
And there's an interesting complementarity
with another option, the knock-in option where
a knock-in option does the opposite.
It begins worthless.
But if the strike price hits the barrier, the specified barrier
in a specified way, then it comes to life,
and it becomes just like an ordinary vanilla option.
And it doesn't matter subsequently
what happens if it hits the barrier again.
Once it's alive, it stays alive.
So this is our setup.
And what can we do?
So why don't you take a few minutes to think about it,
and then we can work through it together.

OK, let's look at it together.
So I've taken a risk-free rate equal to 0
to simplify the math, because this is a math example,
and it'll be a lot easier.
The Black-Scholes equation will go from four terms down to two.
So this is not a realistic solution that you could trade.
Although these days, with interest rates so low,
it might not be a bad approximation.
However, we're making a mathematical simplification
just for the purposes of doing our example here.
This is not the right financial equation.
So we're just setting r equal to 0 to simplify the math, OK?
So the idea is we want to think about what we saw in lecture
about how the diffusion and the random walk property of stock
prices looks like the behavior that we saw in the diffusion
equation where we saw that we could deal
with barriers by a method of images,
by looking at reflected points.
So we might think, we might have an idea
that we could try to take a look at the ordinary solution
to the Black-Scholes equation.
Let's say, so can we relate--
let's ask, can we relate the usual solution--
let me call it C of S,t to something at an image price--
let's call it-- let's say to option value
at the reflected price or the image price.
Now, how are we going to find it?
Well, let's just try doing the usual thing.
We know that S should be thought of as a logarithmic variable.
We know that we want the same distance below as above.
So we might take a look at, for example,
trying an image price of the form--
let me call it log S tilde to be 2 log X minus log S. So
that way, they're equally spaced above or below the barrier.
So if C is the value of the option-- that is,
it's the function that's a Black-Scholes function that we
have, it looks like we might be able to write things in terms
of--

so that is, could we have C of S, t minus C
of X squared over S and t?
Now you notice what happens.
So I've re--exponentiated, and we can see that this satisfies
the boundary condition.
Because if S is equal to X, the two terms cancel.
If the first term has an X, is equal to X,
the second term has X squared over X,
the two terms would cancel.
So this is great.
It satisfies the boundary condition.
The problem is it doesn't quite satisfy the differential
equation.
So it's close, but we're not quite there.
So what we're going to do is let's try--
so unfortunately, not a solution.

So let's try something different.
Let's not give up too quickly just yet.
So let's try the form S over X to some power--
let's say, alpha-- times C of X squared over S times t.
What's our motivation for this?
Well, if we can do it, we can solve it.
We know that the Black-Scholes equation
is homogeneous in the powers of S.
I've written X as a constant.
But rather than just writing S to the alpha,
I'm writing it as S over X to the alpha.
Now it's automatically clear when
S equals X, that pre-factor is equal to 1,
and my usual equation goes through.
So this is a guess.
We're going to try it out and see where it leads.
And if we do it well, and we're lucky,
we'll have a good answer.
If not, it's back to the drawing board.
But let's give it a try.
So what shall we do?
Let's compute some partial derivatives, shall we?
So we have-- let's give this a name.
Let's call this f of S and t.
Obviously, it also depends on X and the other parameters.
So let's compute.

Partial of f with respect to t is
going to be S over X to the alpha partial of C
with respect to t.
That was easy, because the pre-factor
doesn't have any t's in it.
First, partial with respect to us is going to be--
I'm going to be able to pull out a factor of this
from my final answer.
This is going to be alpha over S times C.
And that comes from differentiating with respect
to the pre-factor.
S to the alpha goes as alpha S to the S minus 1-- excuse
me, S to the alpha, the derivative,
it's alpha S to the alpha minus 1.
So I've written that as S to the alpha.
And the minus 1 is down here, just so I can pull out
that common pre-factor.
And then I differentiate C, and I
need to worry about the X squared over S in its argument.
So I'm going to get another term, which
will be minus X squared over S squared times C prime dC dS.

And now if we compute the second derivative,
we get a somewhat messier expression,
but all will become clear shortly.

S over X raised to the alpha times--
now we're taking two derivatives,
so we're taking the derivative of the expression above.
We're going to get one term is going to be alpha,
alpha minus 1 over S squared times C. I'm
going to get acting on the X squared over S squared.
That's going to give me a term, which will
be plus 2 times alpha minus 1.

Rather, this is acting on the alpha minus S.
This is the cross-term.
The middle term is minus X squared over S squared times dC
dS plus one more term, finally, minus X squared over S squared,
squared, times second partial of C with respect to dS squared.
So let's take a look.
These are our three partial derivatives.
And remember, we're looking for the Black-Scholes equation
when we set the interest rate equal to 0.
And that means that there's no first derivative term.
So this term here won't be present.
We really just need to worry about this term and this one.
Now, notice something interesting
about this final expression.
Look at the alpha independence of it.
There's something we might guess is a lucky choice for alpha
or an inspired choice for alpha.
How about alpha equals 1?
If alpha equals 1, this part vanishes, this part vanishes,
and the coefficient looks very simple.

So if we choose alpha equals 1 for our trial solution,
then we get the equation partial of f with respect
to t plus sigma S squared over 2 second partial
of f with respect to squared--
is going to be S over X to the alpha, which is equal to 1,
times partial of C with respect to t plus sigma S tilde
squared over 2.
And actually, I should have put in tildes before.
Apologies.
Tilde.
And here for our derivatives, tilde,
where we're taking these derivatives and a tilde here.
So now we have that our expression for f
gives us something in terms of the transformed variable,
our expression here.
And we know that that's equal to 0,
because that satisfies the Black-Scholes equation.
So therefore, we have the value of the down-and-out call
option, down-and-out call.
That's this form.
C of down-and-out S and t is just
C of t minus S over X C of S squared over S, t.
That is, the derivatives we had above with respect to tilde
are derivatives with respect to the first argument of the call
function.
So this is for S greater than or equal to the barrier X
and equal to 0 for S less than or equal to X.
And that's our solution.
So what we did is we took our notion
that the call option formula solves Black-Scholes equation.
We had a barrier.
We found that we could satisfy the barrier conditions
by using method of images by looking at a point below.
We constructed something that was close,
by looking at that argument X squared of S. That's
in logarithmic variables.
That's the equivalent to looking above and below the barrier
by an equal reflected amount.
We saw that we needed another pre-factor, just as
in our discussion of the survival probabilities.
We put in a guess for it.
We solved for our particular parameter,
alpha, that was in the coefficient.
We get a final result that gives us
the value of the option above the barrier
and 0 below the barrier.
And in fact, expanding this out, you'll
see that it looks very much like the expression
that we had for the survival probabilities.
And there we go.
