
PROFESSOR: Then how do we account
for these deferred tax assets and liabilities?
First, let's take a look at DTAs.
DTAs arise when tax income is larger than book income.
This result in higher cash taxes paid
than the accounting tax expense or provision for income taxes.
One common example of this is deferred revenue.
We learned in revenue recognition class
that deferred revenue is not recognized
as revenue or pre-tax income for accrual counting purposes.
But in tax accounting, deferred revenue
is recognized as taxable income.
This ultimately leads to higher taxes.
The difference, hence, becomes DTA.
How will this look like on the balance sheet equation?
Let's say a firm paid $100,000 in taxes in cash.
But for book purposes, the tax expense was only $80,000.
The $20,000 difference becomes the DTA.
Deferred tax liabilities, or DTLs,
are almost an exact opposite to DTAs in many aspects.
DTLs arise when tax income is lower than the book income.
And therefore, cash taxes paid is lower
than accounting tax expenses.
An example of DTLs is depreciation.
And accrual accounting, one of the most commonly used
depreciation methods is straight depreciation.
However, in tax accounting, accelerated method
is most commonly used, suggesting
that at least in the early years of PPE,
accounting depreciation expense would be lower
than actual cash taxes paid.
Therefore, this results in lower taxes
paid than the tax expense.
The difference is the DTL.
In terms of BSE, if accounting tax expense was $100,000
and cash taxes paid is $80,000, DTL increases by $20,000
to accommodate the differences.
Where exactly would you see deferred tax assets
or deferred tax liabilities?
Typically, these are located in the footnotes section
of the balance sheet, as seen in this example.
It is not unusual to see both DTAs and DTLs in a firm,
how is income taxes represented in the income statement?
Again, let's look at the tax footnotes.
In the footnotes section, there separately as an item provision
for income taxes.
In this example, how much was GAAP provision
for income taxes.
The last row tells us it's $428 million.
This is also reflected in the income statement
under the same name.
Where can we find the actual taxes paid for 2012?
How much taxes do they need to pay for this year?
Under the term current taxes, $693 million
is recorded for 2012.
Current taxes represent the cash taxes paid for the year.
How much taxes are deferred?
Under the row, deferred taxes in the footnotes,
we see $265 million recorded as deferred taxes.
Note that cash taxes paid, which is current taxes, $693 million,
are higher than the provision for income taxes, which
is for $428 million.
We're seeing deferred tax assets in this case.
What transactions did they record?
We mentioned that cash taxes paid for this year, or year
2012, is $693 million.
Therefore cash decreases by $693 million.
We've also shown that the tax provision was $428 million.
So retained earnings decreased by that amount.
To balance these two out, DTA increases by $265 million.
DTA is an item in the assets.
The footnotes provide a detailed description--
on detailed description on DTA and DTL.
The balances shown in the left reflect
the difference between GAAP provision
and the taxes actually paid to the IRS.
These are cumulative, since they are balances.
In this example, what was the aggregate difference in taxes
recognized under GAAP and paid for deferred revenue in 2012?
Under the row, deferred revenue, $129 million
is reported as deferred revenue.
Another question would be, what difference
in recognized revenue led to this DTA?
In order to answer this question,
we need to assume what the tax rate might
have been for this firm.
Let's say the tax rate is 30%.
$129 million, which is the deferred tax
assets, divided by the tax rate of 30%, is $430 million.
This is the difference in the recognized revenue.
Another aspect of income taxes is valuation allowance.
To provide a background for this,
notice that DTAs act like prepaid assets.
And we need taxable income to offset the DTAs.
If a firm keeps making losses under the tax accounting
definition, DTA would not be exhausted.
Precisely for this type of situation,
if management does not think the company
will have enough future taxable income
to be able to use all the DTAs, then
a contra asset must be established against the DTAs.
This contra asset account is called the valuation allowance.
Valuation allowance can be also found in the footnotes.