
PROFESSOR: Hi, everyone.
Welcome to recitation 6 of the financial accounting
course.
In this recitation, we'll cover financial statement analysis
and go over various financial ratios.
In particular, we'll study liquidity and solvency ratios,
profitability ratios, efficiency ratios, and DuPont analysis.
There are three commonly used types
of ratios for a financial statement analysis.
First, there's liquidity and solvency ratios.
These ratios can answer the question,
does the company have the ability to pay its bills?
Firms with higher liquidity and solvency ratios, in general,
have higher cash or assets that could be easily liquidated.
Profitability ratios show how profitable a firm is.
Firms with higher profitability earn
more profit per assets or revenues generated.
Finally, efficiency ratios show how efficient
a firm is managed.
We'll go over examples of each types of ratios
in the next few slides.
Let's go over some formulas for each type of ratios.
First, for liquidity and solvency ratios,
leverage ratio and current ratio are most common.
Leverage ratio, sometimes called debt to equity ratio,
is total liabilities over total shareholders' equity.
This ratio shows how much a firm is levered.
The current ratio is current assets
over current liabilities.
This ratio shows how much current liquid assets
are available, as opposed to current liabilities.
The higher this ratio is, the more comfortable
a firm will be repaying current liabilities.
Let's take a look at profitability ratios.
First, let's look at the margins.
Net margin is net income over total revenue.
This shows how much net income a firm can generate per revenue.
Gross margin, on the other hand, is
calculated as revenue minus COGS over revenue.
In other words, it's gross profit over revenue.
This measures the gross profit generated per revenue.
On the other hand, return on investment
usually deals with return on assets or return on equity.
ROA is measured as net income over total assets.
ROE is net income over total shareholders' equity.
Both measure how much net income could be
generated per assets or equity.
What about operating efficiency?
These ratios are relatively less straightforward.
First, accounts receivables turnover
is the revenue over net accounts receivable.
Higher credit sales but lower accounts receivable balance
would imply that the firm has collected cash pretty quickly.
Inventory turnover is calculated as cost of goods
sold divided by inventory.
High COGS and low inventory would
imply that the firm has pretty quick turnover
of your inventory, which is a good sign.
Finally, days receivable is 365, which
is the number of days in a year, divided by a cash receivables
turnover.
This measures the average number of days
the receivables is outstanding before it's collected.
Before we get into any of the example questions,
let's briefly review the changes in ratios
and how they're calculated.
Calculating how a transaction would change the ratios that we
would learn here is important, and will show up frequently
in problem sets and exams.
The first step when determining how a ratio would change
is to check what your initial ratio is.
Whether it's above or below one.
Then check whether a transaction you're analyzing
will affect the denominator, numerator, or both.
For example, if leverage is 3 over 2 or 1.5,
and the firm issued both debt and equity $1 million each,
the ending leverage will be 4 over 3
by adding 1 to the denominator and 1 to the numerator.
Therefore, this transaction would decrease
the original leverage ratio.