
PROFESSOR: Hi, everyone.
Welcome to recitation 6 of the Financial Accounting course.
In this recitation, we'll cover income taxes.
In particular, we will cover temporary tax differences,
such as deferred tax assets and deferred tax liabilities, how
to account for these income taxes, and effective tax rates.
Before we get into the specifics,
it is important to cover some basic distinctions related
to income taxes.
First, pre-tax income is generated
under accrual based revenue recognition principle-- i.e.
GAAP.
This is what we have seen for a regular revenue recognition
process, which we have covered in previous classes.
Taxable income is income before taxes generated
using the tax code this is typically
different from accrual accounting income,
and it's more similar to cash accounting.
Cash taxes are taxes paid to the IRS,
as determined by the tax code.
This is tax from the taxable income.
Finally, tax provision is tax expense
recorded in the financial statements, which
is based upon GAAP income.
It is important to understand that taxable income does not
equal pre-tax or book income.
As briefly mentioned, book income uses accrual methods,
and tax income uses methods more similar to cash accounting.
The difference risen from the different methods
may be permanent or temporary.
Permanent differences include penalties and fines,
municipal bond treatments, and stock compensation.
Temporary items involve differences
in depreciation calculations, deferred revenue, and so on.
In this recitation, we'll focus on the temporary differences.
Temporary book tax differences will eventually be made equal.
However, business cycles may make
this process take a long time.
US GAAP has a different set of rules
for recognizing revenue and expenses, which
is accrual based, than the tax code, which is cash based.
As we have seen before, much of a difference between accrual
based system and a cash based system
is in the timing of recognizing revenues and expenses.
Temporary book tax differences arise primarily
as a result of these timing differences.
For example, under US GAAP, when a firm purchases PPE,
it depreciates the asset gradually over time,
whereas the tax code that allows for immediate and accelerated
depreciation.
We will go over this in more detail in the following slides.
Temporary tax differences can cause the tax provision
which, is the expense reported on the income statement,
to vary from actual cash taxes paid.
Accrual based accounting requires
companies to report these differences, using accounts
that we refer to as deferred tax assets, or DTAs,
and deferred tax liabilities, DTLs.
We can think of a DTA as prepaid taxes.
DTAs are recorded when cash taxes
paid are higher than the tax expense.
We can think of a DTL as unpaired taxes.
DTLs are recorded when cash taxes paid
are lower than the tax expense.