
PROFESSOR: In this section, let's
look at effective tax rates.
The formula for effective tax rate
is tax expenses divided by GAAP pre-tax income.
Effective tax rate, or ETR, tries
to capture the true tax burdens of a firm,
rather than US statutory rate of 35%, as of 2017.
The difference between ETRs and the statutory rate
can arise from different reasons.
But to name a few, first, there are items recognized by GAAP
but not the tax code, i.e. the permanent differences
between book accounting and tax accounting,
interest received on tax exempt bonds, such as municipal bonds
or fines paid to government and associated legal expenses
are some examples.
Second, differences in tax rates on foreign earnings
can be a major factor.
Many firms operate in different jurisdictions or countries.
And different countries have different corporate tax rates.
Third, revaluation of DTA and DTL
due to tax rate changes, and finally stock compensation,
are all examples of sources of different ETRs
and statutory rates.
Let's look at Amazon's income statement
to see where we can obtain effective tax rate information.
Under the income statement, there's
the row income before income taxes.
And this represents the book income before taxes.
In 2012, it was $544 million.
Provision for income taxes represent the tax expenses
under a book accounting, and the number in 2012
was $428 million.
Dividing for $428 million by $544 million
gives us 78.6% of income taxes.
Is this really possible?
Under footnotes, firms explain how their effective tax
rates are different from the statutory rate.
For Amazon, the impact of foreign tax differential
boosted ETR by 31.5 percentage points, with other factors.
Specifically, losses incurred in foreign jurisdictions
for which we may not realize a tax benefit, primarily
generated by subsidiaries located outside of Europe,
reduce our pre-tax income without a corresponding
reduction in our tax expense, and therefore increase
our effective tax rate.
So yes, an effective tax rate of 78.5% can really happen.