
INSTRUCTOR: In the next couple of slides,
we'll cover some practice problems,
use the following definitions, unless otherwise
stated, to solve the problems.
Leverage is total liabilities over total shareholders'
equity.
Current ratio is current assets divided by current liabilities.
Net margin is net income divided by revenue.
Gross margin is revenue minus COGS divided by revenue.
ROA is net income divided by total assets.
ROV is net income over shareholders' equity.
And asset turnover is revenue over total assets.
Note that all balance sheet items use ending values.
Question 1, Ratios and BSE entries.
For each transaction, record the balance sheet equation
and state how the transaction would change
financial statement ratios.
The firm accrued bad debt expense of 12,000.
For our BSE, allowance for doubtful accounts
increases by 12,000, which is a contra asset account.
Retained earnings decreases by 12,000
since it's a bad debt expense.
How would this affect the ratios?
For current ratio, current assets decrease,
and therefore, current ratio decreases.
There's no change in current liabilities.
Return on assets also decreases because net income is lower
and assets is also lower by the same amount,
but since ROA is less than 1, subtracting
the same values for denominator and numerator
would result in a lower value.
Finally, leverage ratio increases
because retained earnings decreases
but liabilities do not.
Second question, sold property, plant, and equipment,
which cost 20,000, and had accumulated depreciation
of 14,000 for $5,000 in cash.
Cash increases by 5,000, PPE decreases by 20,000,
and accumulated depreciation also decreases by 14,000.
Retained earnings also decreased by 1,000
because there's a loss on sale.
For the leverage ratio, this transaction
increases leverage because shareholders' equity decreases
while there's no change in overall liabilities.
Current ratio also increases because cash increases
by 5,000, but there's no change in current liabilities.
Net income decreases because there's
a 1,000 decrease on retained earnings coming
from loss on sale.