
PROFESSOR: Investors or debt and equity holders
care only about after-tax cash flows.
Taxes will influence a firm's after-tax cash flow
to its investors and, consequently,
its choices in investment and financing.
In particular, different financial transactions
and payouts are taxed differently.
For example, interest payments are
tax-exempt at the firm level.
It is treated as an expense.
Dividends and retained earnings are not.
Under such a tax system, financing clearly
matters, because it will affect a firm's tax
bill and its after-tax payoffs.
It's also worth noting that tax code varies substantially
across countries.
In our discussion, we follow the US tax system
only for convenience and illustration.
The methodology we developed, however,
can be applied to other tax systems.
We will start by focusing on corporate taxes
first, assuming no personal taxes.
This is true for many institutional investors,
such as pension funds, charities,
and tax-exempt foundations.
We will return to the impact of personal taxes
at the end of this lecture.
When interest payments are treated
as a firm's expense and as tax-exempt,
then increasing debt can increase firm value
by reducing its tax burden.
We illustrate this point by considering an example.
XYZ Inc generates a safe annual income of $100 million
perpetually.
The discount rate, which should be the risk-free rate, is 10%.
XYZ faces a corporate tax rate of 35%.
Let's now consider two alternative ways
the firm can be financed.
The first is 100% debt financing.
XYZ then pays out all its income of $100 million as interest.
The second way is 100% equity financing.
The firm then pays out $100 million
as dividends or capital gains.
The table on the slide shows XYZ's pre and after-tax cash
flows and their valuations.
The second column describes the firm's cash flows
with 100% debt financing.
The second row gives the pre-tax cash
flow, which is $100 million.
This also equals the total interest payment.
The third row gives the tax the firm has to pay.
Since after the interest payment the firm has no income
to report, it pays zero taxes.
For the firm's investors-- in this case, it's debt holders--
the after-tax income is $100 million.
The firm's value, which is simply
the value of its debt in this case,
is 100 divided by 10%, the discount
rate, which equals $1 billion.
The third column in the table gives the firm's cash flows
under 100% equity financing.
The second row gives the pre-tax cash
flow, which is $100 million, same as before.
The third row is the tax.
With an income of $100 million and a tax rate of 35%,
the tax bill will be $35 million.
For the firm's investors-- in this case, its equity holders--
the after-tax income is 100 minus 35,
which equals $65 million.
The firm's value, which is the value
of its equity in this case, is 65,
which is the annual cash flow divided by the discount rate,
again, 10%.
That gives us $650 million.

Comparing the two financing choices,
it is obvious that debt financing dominates,
because it avoids taxes and increases the after-tax cash
flow to the firm's investors.
In the above analysis, we assume that both debt and equity
holders pay no personal taxes.
It should be clear from the analysis,
however, that personal taxes can change the results, which
we will return to later.
Expanding on what we have learned from the example,
we can extend the MM framework to include corporate taxes.
First, the starting point of MM still holds.
That is the pie before tax remains unaffected by capital
structure.
It is fully determined by the firm's asset or its cash flow.
In other words, the size of the pie before tax
equals the present value of pre-tax cash flow.
But the tax authority, the IRS in the US,
takes a slice before investors.
Financing policy affects the size of that slice.
In particular, since interest payments are tax deductible,
the slice of IRS can be reduced by using more debt.
Consequently, the after-tax value of the firm
depends on its capital structure.
This idea can be clearly illustrated
by the so-called Pie Theory as shown
in the plot on this slide.
The total size of the pie is given
by the present value of the firm's pre-tax cash flow.
It is fixed given the firm's asset.
This pie will then be sliced into three pieces--
the present value of its tax liability,
the present value of debt, D, and the present value
of equity, E. Conservation of cash or value
gives the present value of pre-tax cash flow
equals the present value of tax plus D plus E.
The left hand side, which is the total size of the pie,
is fixed.
Increasing D will then decrease the tax bill
or the present value of tax.
And it has increased the total value
of the firm, which is D plus E. Therefore,
the value of the firm after tax can be increased by increasing
debt, which reduces taxes.
We now formally incorporate the impact
of corporate taxes into the MM framework.
Let's consider two firms--
U and L-- with identical assets.
The asset yields an expected pre-tax cash flow of X
next year and nothing afterwards.
The required rate of return on the asset is rA.
Firm U is 100% equity financed.
That is its unlevered.
Firm L has that level D, which pays an expected interest
rate of rD plus the principal next year.
The corporate tax rate is tau.
Let's ignore personal taxes at this point.
We can now write down the after-tax cash flow
for the two firms in year one.
For Firm U, the after-tax cash flow
is simply 1 minus tau times X. For Firm L,
the after-tax cash flow is 1 minus tau times X,
the pre-tax cash flow, minus interest payment, which is rD,
times D plus rD times D. That gives us 1 minus tau times X
plus tau times rD times D.
The last term in the equation is the tax shield
from debt, which is simply the tax rate times the interest
payment.
We then have the value for each firm as follows.
The value of the unlevered firm, VU,
equals 1 minus tau times X, the after-tax cash
flow, divided by 1 plus the discount rate, rA.
The value of the levered firm, VL,
equals 1 minus tau times X divided by 1
plus rA plus tau times rD times D,
the tax shield, divided by 1 plus rD.
Rewriting that, we have VL equals VU plus tau
times rD times D divided by 1 plus rD.
Here the discount rate for X is rA.
And the discount rate for the tax shield,
which is tau times rD times D, is
rD, same as the expected interest rate on debt,
because they have the same risk.
We summarize the above result as MM Theorem One
with corporate taxes.
The value of a levered firm equals
the value of the unlevered firm with the same asset
plus the present value of the tax shield from debt.
That is VL equals VU plus the present value of the tax
shield.
And, sometimes, we write it as VU plus PVTS, the present value
of tax shield.
As we have seen from the previous example,
the tax shield of debt matters for firm value,
potentially, substantially.
The MM Theorem or the Pie Theory leads us
to the right question and the right answer.
In this case, it allows us to find out
how financing choices can affect the IRS bite of the total pie
and how to minimize it or maximize the remaining
part of the pie.
There are, however, some caveats to keep in mind.
First, not all firms face full marginal corporate tax rate.
Some companies pay no or very low taxes.
For them, the value of tax shield can be limited.
Second, personal taxes can change the results above.
The analysis above leads to valuable implications.
First, raising debt by itself does not create value.
In other words, a firm cannot create value by issuing debt
and then sitting on the cash.
Second, using debt creates value relative to raising
the same amount of funds using equity.
Next, value can be created by generating a tax shield when
either financing an asset or investment with debt
rather than equity or undertake a recapitalisation, that is
retire some equity with debt.
Moreover, the tax advantage of debt can be large.
However, when personal taxes are present,
the tax advantage of debt is reduced
for individual investors.
It becomes smaller when investors are mostly
individuals.
Our next question is then if debt adds value,
why don't firms simply lever up?