
PROFESSOR: If corporate tax is the only issue,
most companies will be 100% debt-financed.
This can't be the whole story.
From the data we have seen, this is not what firms do.
The debt-to-asset ratio is roughly 30%, not 100%.
Common sense suggests that debt is not without costs.
It has its dark side.
In particular, when debt burden is too high,
the firm may have trouble paying, at least
in some states of the economy.
The difficulty in paying will result in financial distress.
Financial distress involves additional costs.
These costs can offset the benefit of more debt.
Let's consider the issue of financial distress
in more detail.
Financial distress refers to the situation
when a firm's cash flow becomes insufficient in covering
its current obligations.
It will lead to a process of resolving the broken contracts
with creditors.
Such a process takes two forms.
One is private negotiation or workout.
Another is bankruptcy supervised by a court.
In analyzing the cause of financial distress
and its costs, it is important to separate causes and effects.
In particular, only those costs that
would not rise outside financial distress should be counted.
For example, a firm in financial distress performs poorly.
Is this a cause or effect?
Well, it depends.
Poor performance may have caused the financial distress
in the first place.
But financial distress can put additional pressure
on the firm, leading to further deterioration
of its performance.
The second part should count as an effect
of financial distress.
We can illustrate how the cost of financial distress
can be important, using again the pie analogy.
The chart on the slide shows how the value of the firm's asset
is split between the different pieces.
The total pie is given by the value of the firm's asset,
which is fixed.
The pie, then, is divided between the different claims
on the firm.
The first claim is taxes, which goes to the government.
This piece has the highest priority.
The second claim is debt, which is the next senior.
The third claim is equity, which is the most junior claim.
The last piece is the cost of financial distress, which
reflects the value it destroys.
In present value terms, we have the present value
of the asset divided into the present value of the four
slices.
For the firm stakeholders, the objective
is to maximize the total value of the firm, which
is debt plus equity.
From the chart, we can see that increasing debt
can reduce taxes and thus increase d plus e.
However, by doing so, the cost of financial distress
also increases, which tends to offset the tax benefit of debt.
If this cost becomes very high, you
will then overwhelm the firm's incentive
to further increasing leverage.