
PROFESSOR: Let us now examine, in more detail,
the costs of financial distress.
We roughly divide the costs into two categories--
direct costs and indirect costs.
Direct costs of financial distress
include legal costs, time spent on dealing with distress,
and so on.
Indirect costs include scare off customers and suppliers,
agency costs--
that is, the divergence in the interests
of managers and shareholders--
debt overhang, which means difficulty
in raising funds to take on good investments, which
may lead to passing up valuable projects,
competitors become more aggressive,
taking on bad risks, and so on.
We will consider each of these costs.
We first consider that direct costs of financial distress,
or bankruptcy.
They include the following items--
legal expenses, court costs, advisory fees, and then
opportunity costs, like distractions
from dealing with creditors.
The next question is, how important these costs are?
It is hard to come up with precise estimates for them,
but we have the following rough ranges.
The direct cost of bankruptcy is about two to five percent
of the total firm value for large companies,
and up to 20% to 25% for small companies.
But we have to weigh this cost by the bankruptcy probability.
Overall, the expected direct cost of bankruptcy
tends to be fairly small, even for a bankruptcy cost
of 20%, which is sort of the case for small companies.
With a bankruptcy probability of 10%, which is high
based on historic data we have seen earlier,
the expected bankruptcy cost is only 2%.

There are, however, two caveats we want to add.
First, the bankruptcy cost can be large for some firms.
Second, the present value of bankruptcy costs
should be expected value, using risk-neutral probabilities, not
physical probabilities.
We now consider the indirect costs of financial distress.
The first type of indirect cost comes
from losing customers and suppliers.
For example, suppliers may demand cash payments now.
This can put the firm into financial distress.
Customers may leave.
Why is this true?
That's because the relationship can be longer term.
What types of firms are more susceptible to this problem?
General Motors or Market Basket?
Market Basket is a retail store for groceries.
There, the relationship between the firm and its customers
are pretty much short term.
Where for General Motors, when you buy a car from GM,
the relationship is longer term.
You may have to go back for repairs and parts.
The second type of indirect cost is agency cost.
Financial distress may cause managers
to take on actions that are not in the best
interest of shareholders.
We can think of many examples, such as cash-in-and-run,
which is to divert resources out of the firm,
excess risk-taking--
gambling for resurrection-- delay
of efficient resolution, or liquidation.
Why are these possibilities costly to the shareholders,
given the fact that, in bankruptcy, they
are out anyway?
This is because debt holders anticipate them, and will
pay less for the debt when it's issued.
In order to reduce the cost of these possibilities,
the stock and bond holders do take preemptive measures,
such as covenants in the debt contract,
and having collateral.
We will have more discussion on covenants later.
The third type of indirect cost for financial distress
is debt overhang.
This is about how debt issued before becomes
too much of a burden on the firm,
so that it will distort its decisions.
We illustrate the effect of debt overhang through an example.
Let's assume Company XYZ's assets in place is risky,
but the risk is idiosyncratic.
Next year, the assets' value is given
by the table on the slide.
There are two possible states next year, good and bad,
given in the first column.
The probabilities are both half, given in the second column.
The third column gives the value of XYZ's asset--
100 in the good state, and 10 in the bad state, all
in million dollars.
For simplicity, we assume that the risk-free rate is zero.
XYZ now has a new investment opportunity
with the following data.
It requires an initial investment of $15 million
today.
It yields a safe payoff of $20 million next year.
At the risk-free rate of zero, the NPV of this project
is minus 15, the initial investment,
plus 20, the payoff next year, discounted
at a discount rate of zero.
That gives us plus $5 million.
Therefore XYZ should take this project.
Suppose that XYZ has an outstanding debt of $40 million
in face value, including interest,
which is due next year.
Since the firm's asset value is $10 million
in the bad state, which is below $40 million,
the debt is risky and will default in the bad state.
Let's now consider how the firm may decide on the new project.
The first table on the slide shows the payoff
to the debt and equity holders in the two states
without the project.
As before, the third column gives the payoff
from the firm's asset in good and bad states, respectively.
The fourth column gives the payoff to debt holders.
It is $40 million in a good state, which is the promised
payment, but in the bad state, the payoff is only $10 million,
which is all the value from the asset.
This is a default state.
The last column gives the payoff to the equity holders.
It is $100 million minus $40 million,
which equals $60 million in the good state, the remainder
of the asset after paying off the debt.
But in the bad state, the payoff to equity holders is zero.
In the default state, the equity holders get nothing.
The second table on the slide shows
the payoff to the debt and equity holders
with the project.
Here we assume that, in order to take the project,
the equity holders will need to put up the initial investment
of $15 million.
The third column in the table gives the asset value
with the new project, in millions of dollars.
In the good state, it is $100 million,
the asset value without the project, plus $20 million,
the value from the new project.
That gives us $120 million.
In the bad state, the total asset value will be $10 million
plus $20 million, and that is $30 million.
The fourth column gives the payoff to debt holders.
In the good state, it's still $40 million,
the face value of the debt.
In the bad state, the payoff becomes $30 million,
which is the total value of the asset.
This is higher than the value without the project,
but still leads to default, as it falls short of $40 million,
the face value of the debt.
The last column gives the payoff to equity holders.
It is $120 million minus $40 million, that is $80 million
in the good state, but still zero in the bad state.
For the firm's equity holders, the NPV
from taking on the project is minus $15 million,
the initial investment, plus the expected payoff next year,
which is half times $20 million plus half times zero,
discounted at zero interest rate, which gives minus
$5 million.
Here, we can use the risk-free interest rate
as the discount rate because the risk is idiosyncratic.
Clearly, equity holders who are running the company
before default will not take on the project
today, despite its positive NPV.
What's going on here?
Well let's take a careful look at the situation.
For the shareholders, if they take on the project,
they will incur the full cost of the initial investment, which
is $50 million, but they only receive part of its payoff--
$20 million in the good state.
For the existing debt holders, if the project is taken,
they incur none of the investment
costs, but they receive part of its payoff--
$20 million in the bad state.
Put it differently, for equity holders perspective,
existing risky debt acts like a tax on new investments.
From this example, we have learned the following--
shareholders of the firm in financial distress
are reluctant to fund valuable projects
when most of the benefits go to existing debt holders.
This type of a problem is also called debt overhang.
This effect is larger as the debt becomes riskier,
and financial distress becomes more likely.
The debt overhang problem shows the potential divergence
in the interest of debt and equity holders
under financial distress.