
PROFESSOR: Let's continue with the example.
How can a firm overcome the debt overhang problem exposed?
That is, when already approaching financial distress.
There are at least two possible measures.
The first is to issue new debt to fund the project,
as equity holders won't fund it.
But how?
Should we use junior or senior debt?
The second approach is financial restructuring.
This could be outside bankruptcy or workout
under a formal bankruptcy procedure.
Let's consider issuing new debt to fund the project.
This solution faces the following challenges.
First, if new debt has lower seniority than existing debt,
it won't improve the situation.
The tax on equity holders for new project is unchanged.
Second, if new debt has the same seniority as the existing debt,
you will mitigate but may not overcome the debt overhang
problem.
Third, if new debt has higher seniority than the existing
debt, you will further reduce the tax
on equity holders for the new investment
by giving them a larger share of its payoff.
Another alternative is to issue debt
with shorter maturity than the existing debt, which
is de facto more senior.
But issuing more senior debt is often
prohibited by the covenants of the existing debt.
Let's consider these scenarios in more detail.
We'll start with the case of issuing junior debt
to fund the project.
All payoffs and values are in million dollars.
Since the existing asset has only idiosyncratic risk,
and the new project is risk-free,
the discount rate for both is the risk-free rate,
which is zero.
Therefore, the current market value
for any payoff in year one is simply its expected payoff.
We will always use this to price debt and equity
in the different situations we consider below.
Existing debt has a face value of 40 due next year.
Without the project, existing debt
has a current market value of 25.
As said above, it simply equals its expected payoff
in year one, which is 1/2 times 40 in the good state
plus 10 in the bad state, which gives 25.
Equity you value is then 1/2 times 60 in a good state
plus 0 in a bad state, which gives 30.
With the new project, the total payoff from the firm's
assets is given in the third column in the table--
120 in the good state and 30 in the bad state.
Suppose the firm issues new junior debt
to raise $15 million.
Since in the bad state there's not enough money
to pay the existing debtholders, the new junior debt
will receive nothing.
This then implies that its payoff in the good state
must be 30 in order to justify the current value of 15.
The fourth column in the table gives the payoff
to the old debtholders with the project,
40 and 30 in the two states.
The current value of the old debt is now 1/2 times
40 plus 30, which is 35.
The fifth column gives the payoff to the new debtholders--
30 in a good state and zero in a bad state.
Its current market value is indeed
15, the average of 30 and zero.
The last column is the payoff to the equity holders,
50 in a good state and zero in a bad state.
In this case, the value of the existing debt increases to 35.
It is 25 without the project.
The new junior debtholders break even.
The NPV for the equity holders is given by the value of equity
with the project, which is 1/2 times
50 plus 1/2 times 0, that is 25 minus 30,
the equity value without the project.
This gives minus 5.
Therefore, the equity holders won't take the project.
We now consider the case of issuing new debt
with the same seniority as the existing debt.
The existing debt still has a face value of 40 due next year.
Without the project, the value of the debt and equity
is the same as before, 25 and 30, respectively.
With the new project, the payoff from the asset
is the same as before, given by the third column in the table,
120 and 30 in the good and bad states, respectively.
We issue new debt with the same seniority as the existing debt
to fund the project.
We have the following conditions.
First, we need to raise $15 million.
Therefore, the current market value of the new debt
should be 15, which equals its expected payoff in year one,
since the discount rate is 0.
In the good state, both the old debt and the new debt
will be paid in full at their face values.
In the bad state, however, default occurs.
With the same seniority, the old and new debt
will be splitting the value of the asset on the pro-rata basis
according to their face values.
The above imply that the new debt's face value should be 20.
The payoff of old debt is given by the fourth column
in the table, 40 in a good state and 20 in a bad state.
Note that in the bad state the old debt shares the asset value
with the new debt, in proportion to the offense values.
This gives a weight of 2/3 for the old debt
and 1/3 for the new debt.
Given that the total asset value is 30 in the bad state,
the payoff to the old debtholders
is 2/3 times 30, which is 20.
The payoff to the new debt is then 10.
The market value of the old debt with the project
is now 1/2 times 40 plus 20.
That gives 30.
The payoff to the new debt with the same seniority
as the old debt is given by the fifth column.
It is 20 in a good state and 10 in a bad state.
As stated above, for the new debt we have its face value
is 20, which is paid in full in a good state.
In a bad state, it shares the asset value of 30
with the old debt in proportion to their face values,
which gives 10.
The market value of the new debt is 1/2 times 20 plus 10.
That gives 15, which is the amount needed
for the new project.
The payoff to equity is then given
in the last column in the table, which is 60 in a good state
and 0 in a bad state.
Its current market value is then 1/2 times 60 plus 0.
That gives 30, same as without the project.
From the above analysis, we conclude
that by taking the project, the value of existing debt
increases from 25 to 30 with a net gain of $5 million.
The new debtholders break even.
For the equity holders, the NPV from taking the project
is 1/2 times 60 plus 1/2 times 0 divided by 1
plus 0 minus 30, which gives 0.
That is they are indifferent.
Clearly, in this case, equity holders
have avoided any loss by taking the project.
But all the gain still go to the existing debtholders.
Next, we consider the case of issuing new debt
with higher seniority than the existing debt.
The starting point is the same as before in terms of the face
value of the existing debt and the market value of debt
and equity without the project.
As before, with the new project, the asset value in both states
are given by the third column in the table.
120 in a good state and 30 in a bad state.
If we issue new debt with higher seniority to raise $15 million
for the project, it's face value only need to be 15.
This is because with the new project,
the total asset value exceeds 15 in both states.
Therefore, the new debt will always be paid in full
and becomes risk-free, as shown by the table's fifth column.
Its current market value will be 15, exactly what's needed.
The fourth column of the table shows the payoff
to the old debtholders.
In a good state, it's 40, its face value.
In a bad state, it is the value of the asset,
which is 30 minus the payoff to the senior debt, which is 15.
And that leaves 15.
The value of the debt now becomes 1/2 times 40 plus 15,
and that equals 27.5.
The last column in the table gives the payoff
to the equity holders.
65 in a good state and zero in a bad state.
The NPV for the shareholders, then, from taking the project
is 32.5 minus 30.
That is plus $2.5 million.
Clearly, in this case, the equity holders
will be willing to take the project.
But the challenge is that the covenants of the existing debt
typically prohibits the issuing of more senior debt.
Will the existing debtholders agree to break the covenants?
Effectively, this will require a restructuring of the existing
debt.
In principle, restructuring can help to avoid inefficiency.
It often involves debt for equity exchange and/or debt
rescheduling and restructuring.
The basic idea is as follows.
Offer to give debtholders equity in return
for canceling the existing debt.
Debtholders then become equity holders
and will have aligned interests.
Once debt is reduced, it also reduces its tax
on new investments.
Another way to look at this is that to overcome debt overhang,
we need to cut debt.
The underlying mechanism is to convince existing debtholders
to accept past losses in exchange for a share in gains
from new investments.
The discussion above focuses on the problems
of financial distress exposed.
Foreseeing these problems, firms and the market
take measures ex ante to reduce the potential inefficiencies
caused by financial distress.
Here are some simple examples.
Firms expecting large funding needs
should avoid too much debt.
Firms anticipating valuable investment opportunities
should avoid too much debt.
If leverage cannot be avoided, structure liabilities to allow
easy restructuring where needed, such as actively managing
liabilities, using bank debt rather than bonds,
which have diverse investors, dealing with fewer banks rather
than many.