
PROFESSOR: Putting the pieces together,
we arrive at a simple theory on capital structure.
From the MM Irrelevance Theorem, the value of the firm
starts with the value of its asset.
We then add two ingredients that can change the size of the pie.
The first is taxes.
In particular, favorable tax treatment
of debt at the corporate level gives debt
a tax advantage in financing.
However, debt raises the possibility
of financial distress.
The present value of distress costs
tend to offset the value from debt's tax shield.
The trade off between these two factors
gives the static optimum for a firm's capital structure.
This theory views the firm and its capital structure
as relatively stable over time.
As we'll see later, often we have
to properly capture the time evolution of the firm's
asset, debt, and equity.
In other words, a more dynamic framework is needed.
We will return to this point in the next lecture.
The figure on the slide illustrates the key insights
behind the trade-off theory.
The x-axis is a firm's debt or leverage level.
The y-axis is the value of the firm.
The red a horizontal line plots the value of the firm
if it is unlevered.
According to MM, it's also the value of the levered firm
in the absence of frictions.
The blue dotted line plots the value
of the levered firm with the tax shield
from debt with no cost of financial distress.
Here the present value of the tax shield
increases linearly with the debt level.
In the absence of distress cost, the firm
would increase the debt level.
However, as the level of debt increases,
it also becomes riskier.
The chance of financial distress increases, and so does
the present value of distress cost.
This will bring down the value of the firm
from the blue dotted line, yielding the solid black line.
At low levels of debt, the cost of financial distress is small
and the tax benefit dominates.
As the debt level increases, the cost of financial distress
will start to dominate.
The optimum is at an intermediate debt level
which maximizes the total value of the firm,
including the present value of tax shield
and the present value of distress cost.
This optimum gives the optimal capital structure.
Clearly, it's determined by how the present value of tax shield
and the present value of distress cost
change with the firm's debt level.
We can also express the trade-off theory as follows.
The value of the levered firm is given
by the value of the unlevered firm plus adjustments
from the leverage effect, which includes two items--
tax benefit from debt and cost of financial distress,
also from debt.
Analytically, we have VL, the value of the levered firm,
equals VU, the value of the unlevered firm,
plus the present value of tax shield from debt
minus the present value of cost of financial distress.
We also call this the Adjusted Present Value, or APV.
The optimal level of debt is chosen
to maximize the VL, the firm's total value, including
the leverage effects or its APV.
From the trade-off theory, we can immediately
draw useful implications.
First, firms with low present value of financial distress
cost should load up on debt to increase tax benefits.
Second, firms with high present value of distress costs
should be more conservative in leverage.
Third, the key then lies in knowing the industry
and company characteristics that lead to high present value
of distress costs.
In particular, we can write the following,
the present value of distress cost
equals the risk neutral probability of distress
times the distress cost.