
PROFESSOR: As the previous example demonstrates,
a key in determining the optimal capital structure
is the present value of distress cost.
We have also learned that two major factors
are effecting the present value of distress cost.
The first factor is the probability of distress.
More precisely, the risk neutral probability.
This depends on the volatility of the firm's cash flows.
Volatile cash flows arise for various reasons,
such as industry change, technology change,
cyclical industry, macro shocks, start-ups, and so on.
The second factor is the cost arising from distress.
These costs can be large in the following situations.
When there's a lot of need for external funds for CAPX
or market share, financially strong competitors,
customers and suppliers care about your financial position.
Summarizing our analysis in the trade-off theory of capital
structure, we have the following checklist when
considering financial choices.
First is taxes.
Does the firm benefit from debt tax shield?
The second is the present value of distress costs.
Relevant factors include cash flow volatility,
need for external funding for investments, competitive threat
under financial distress, customers and suppliers
sensitive about distress.
Beyond the qualitative conclusions
we can draw from our analysis, how
about quantitative predictions?
Can a theory give us the right number for leverage?
The answer is less clear cut.
First, there's no one size fits all formula.
Second, the key is to understand the factors affecting
capital structure decisions.
Third, in actual decisions, one need
to apply business and financial judgment, taking into account
the factors listed above.
In particular, the best we can do in deciding on leverage
will be ranges, not point values.
After all, as the value of the firm's asset changes over time,
its leverage will also fluctuate.
There's no point to pin it down to a single number.
With the simple theory above, what
can we explain in terms of what firms do?
It is good at helping us understand the capital
structure or leverage differences at broad levels.
For example, debt ratio of 43.2% for electric and gas
versus 3.5% for computer software.
Industries with more volatile cash flows, in general,
have lower than leverage.
The theory is not very good at explaining small differences
in debt ratios, such as 22.9% for food production
versus 9.1% for manufacturing equipment.
It's also not so good at explaining
short-term fluctuations in debt ratio.
Other factors are also important.
We will return to some of them in the following lectures.