
PROFESSOR: So far, we have only considered taxes
at the firm level and ignored taxes at the personal level.
As it turns out, personal taxes are also
important in effecting firms capital structure choices.
We now consider the effect of personal taxes.
Let's start with the following simple setting.
The firm's asset yields a pre-tax expected cash
flow X next year and nothing afterwards.
It has debt at level D. The interest rate on debt is rD.
Corporate tax rate is tau.
In addition, investors also pay personal taxes.
The tax rate on equity, which includes taxes on dividends
and capital gains is pi.
The tax rate on debt interest is delta.
Let's ignore cost of financial distress for the moment.
In general, tax code is a lot more complicated
than what is assumed here.
We use a simple structure merely to illustrate
the potential impact on personal taxes.
We first consider the cash flow next year
after corporate and personal taxes.
To equity holders, it is 1 minus pi times 1 minus tau times
x minus rD times D. x minus rD times D
is the asset payoff after interests.
Times 1 minus tau is what we have after corporate tax.
Then times 1 minus pi is what is left after personal tax equity
payoff.
To debt holders, it is 1 minus delta times rD times D.
The total after tax cash flow is the sum
of the two, which gives 1 minus pi times 1 minus tau times x
plus 1 minus delta minus 1 minus pi times 1 minus
tau, then times the interest payment on debt,
which is rD times D.
Here, the first term gives the after tax payoff to the firm,
if it's all equity financed.
The second term gives the tax impact of debt.
The present value is given by the after tax cash flow
discounted at the appropriate discount rates.
As an approximation, we can use the following.
For all equity financed firms, the discount rate
is 1 minus pi times ra, the after tax return on assets.
For debt income, the discount rate
is 1 minus delta times rD, also the after tax return on debt.
For our purposes, we only need to know
that the value of the leverage firm
is VL equals the present value of 1
minus pi times 1 minus tau times x,
that's the after tax cash flow for an unlevered firm,
plus the present value of the debt effect, which
is 1 minus delta minus 1 minus pi times 1 minus tau times
rD times D.
We then arrive at the extension of MM1
with both corporate and personal taxes.
The firm's value is given by VL equals VU plus 1 minus
delta minus 1 minus pi times 1 minus tau times
the present value of rD times D.
In order to show the impact of personal taxes,
we consider several special cases.
If equity pays large dividends and pi
equals delta, that is dividend is taxed
at the same rate as interest, then VL equals VU plus 1
minus delta times tau times PV of rD times D. In this case,
debt has a clear advantage over equity as it brings tax shield.
If equity can avoid dividends, it becomes more attractive.
In particular when pi is less than delta,
the tax shield of debt becomes less than 1 minus delta
times tau times the present value of rD times D.
If capital gains tax can be avoided,
equity might dominate debt in financing.
In particular, if pi is approximately 0, which
means that the tax on equity is practically 0,
we then have 1 minus delta minus 1 minus tau less than 0
when tau is less than delta.
In this case, debt has a negative overall tax shield.
Although our analysis is simplified,
it demonstrates that if equity enjoys a tax advantage
at the personal level, it can offset the tax advantage
debt enjoys at the firm level.