
J R SCOTT: Hello, everyone and welcome to the second
recitation of 15.435x.
In this recitation, we'll be reviewing
futures contracts and swaps.
The recitation will consist of three problems.
In the first problem, we'll see how
two companies with different borrowing rates
can mutually benefit from a swap.
In the second problem, we'll see how a futures
contract can be used for hedging as well as speculation motives.
And in the third problem, we'll review some of the mechanics
and pricing of currency swaps.
Without further ado, let's begin.
Problem 1-- company A, a British manufacturer,
wishes to borrow US dollars at a fixed rate of interest.
Company B, a US multinational, wishes to borrow sterling
at a fixed rate of interest.
They've been quoted the following interest
rates per annum, adjusted for differential tax rates.
Company A can borrow in pounds at 11% and in dollars at 7%.
Company B can borrow in pounds at 10.6%
and in dollars at 6.2%.
Design a swap that will net a financial institution, acting
as an intermediary, 10 basis points per annum,
and will produce a gain of 15 basis points per annum
for each of the two companies, relative to what
they would pay borrowing directly
in their preferred currencies.
The first thing to note is that company A
has a relative advantage when borrowing in pounds.
Although it costs company a 40 basis points
more to borrow in pounds relative to company B,
it costs company a 80 basis points more
to borrow in dollars.
Symmetrically, company B has a relative advantage
when borrowing in dollars.
I like to think of this setup like an international trade.
For company B, it has an absolute advantage in borrowing
in both sterling and in dollars, although company
has a relative advantage, sometimes
called a comparative advantage, when borrowing in pounds.
This fact leads us to say that there
is an opportunity for both companies
to lower their borrowing costs using
a fixed-for-fixed currency swap.
This question is asking us how exactly
the swap should be structured.
Let's assume that both company A and company
B want to borrow the same principal amount, which we I'll
denote capital P, in dollars, and capital P-star in pounds.
Let's assume that company A initially
borrows P-star in pounds at an interest rate of 11%.
In the swap, the intermediary is going to exchange P-star for P
at the spot exchange rate between pounds and dollars.
Since we're on an annual basis, the swap
can be structured so that every year, company
A pays a fixed interest rate on the principal, P,
to the intermediary in dollars, and receives a fixed interest
rate on the principal, P-star in pounds.
To finance its loan, company A needs
to receive at least a fixed interest rate of 11% in pounds.
Since company A wants to borrow in US dollars,
it will pay an interest rate that
is 15 basis points less than the 7% interest
rate it could have paid without the swap, or 6.85%.
What about company B?
Company B initially borrows P in dollars
at an interest rate of 6.2%.
In the currency swap, the intermediary exchanges
P for P-star at the spot exchange rate.
Each year, company B pays a fixed interest rate
on the principal, P-star to the intermediary in pounds
and receives a fixed interest rate
on the principal P, in dollars.
To finance its loan, company B needs
to receive a fixed interest rate of at least 6.2% in dollars.
Since company B wants to borrow in pounds,
it will pay an interest rate that
is 15 basis points less than the 10.6% interest
rate it could have paid without the swap or 10.45%.
At the terminal date of the currency swap,
the principal is exchanged again.
The intermediary is going to earn a spread of 10 basis
points on the swap.
The spread is partly compensation for the exchange
rate risk faced by the intermediary
but in principle, the intermediary
could always hedge this risk using forward contracts.
The more important risk is counterparty risk,
the risk that either company A or company B fails
to meet its obligations.
The diagram below summarizes the cash flows of the swap.
The kind of an important thing to note
here is that at initiation, the principal
amounts P and P-star flow in the opposite direction
of the arrows.
Interest payments flow in the same direction as the arrows
during the life of the swap and the principal amounts also
flow in the same direction as the arrows
at the terminal date of the swap.