PROFESSOR: OK, now that we've had
some practice with a currency swap,
let's move on to a question about futures contracts.
In this problem, we are asked to imagine
that a commercial builder takes a short position in a mortgage
futures contract, which locks in a borrowing rate linked
to the price of a mortgage-backed security
or MBS.
The commercial builder, however, has no plans
to borrow using a mortgage.
Do you think that shorting the futures contract, in this case,
is speculating or hedging?
All right, before we solve this question,
we should first review the mechanics of a mortgage futures
contract.
A mortgage futures contract is similar
to the familiar commodities futures contract
that Professor Lucas reviewed in lecture, except, in this case,
the commodity is a mortgage-backed security,
a security which is backed by the cash
flows from a pool of mortgages.
So a mortgage futures contract locks in a pre-specified price
for a mortgage-backed security, equivalently, a borrowing rate
on a mortgage in the future.

Well, armed with that information,
we could see that a long position in a mortgage futures
contract will increase in value if the price
of the mortgage-backed security increases,
or, equivalently, if interest rates decrease.
The way to see this is to recall that prices
in yields or interest rates on fixed income securities
move inversely.
A short position, on the other hand,
will decrease in value if the price
of the mortgage-backed security decreases,
or, equivalently, if interest rates increase.
Now, since the commercial builder
is taking a short position in the mortgage futures contract,
he will profit if interest rates increase
or if the mortgage-backed security declines in price.
Typically, higher interest rates discourage real estate
investment.
So it is reasonable to think that the commercial builder is
shorting the mortgage futures contract to protect himself
against a decline in the demand for commercial real estate
construction.
This would be consistent with a hedging
motive and not necessarily a speculative motive.