
PROFESSOR: Now that we've had an example of a futures contract,
let's finish up the recitation with one final problem
about swaps.
In this case, we have a currency swap with a remaining
life of 15 months.
The swap involves exchanging interest
at 10% on 20 million pounds for interest
at 6% on $30 million US dollars once a year.
The term structure of risk-free interest rates in the United
Kingdom is flat at 7%, and the term structure
of risk-free rates in the United States is flat at 4%.
Both of these interest rates are with annual compounding.
The current exchange rate is 1.55 dollars
per pound sterling.
In part A we are asked, what is the value
of the swap to the party paying sterling,
equivalently receiving dollars?
Well, before we begin solving this question,
we should first note that the swap involves
exchanging the sterling interest of 20 times 10%, which
equals 2 million pounds for the dollar
interest of $30 times 6%, which equals $1.8 million.
And of course, with any currency swap,
the principal amounts are also exchanged
at the swap's terminal date.
So there's an easy way to solve this question,
and there's a hard way to solve this question.
I thought in part A, we would start with the easy way
to solve this question-- the so-called bond valuation
method.
The key here is to notice that the cash flows of the swap
are identical to those of a coupon bond.
The value of the sterling bond underlying the swap
is as follows.
It's the sum of the 2 million pounds of interest received
three months into the 15 month period discounted
at the constant 7% interest rate, plus the sum of the 2
million pounds interest plus the 20 million
pound principal amount received 15 months later,
discounted at the 7% constant risk-free rate,
which is equal to 22.182 million pounds.
Similarly, the value of the dollar bond underlying the swap
is also the sum of two terms.
In the first term, we have $1.8 million interest,
received 3 months into the 15 month period,
discounted at the 4% constant risk-free rate.
And the second term, we have the $1.8 million
interest received 15 months later, plus the $30 million
principal amount also received 15 months later,
both discounted at the 4% constant risk-free rate, which
gives us a total of $32.061 million.
Thus, the value of the swap to the party
paying sterling and receiving dollars--
which will be a number in dollars--
is the difference between the value of the dollar bond
underlying the swap--
$32.061 million-- minus the value of the sterling bond
underlying the swap adjusted for the risk-free rate.
So the 22.182 million pounds times the exchange rate
of 1.55 dollars per pound.
The difference between these two quantities
is negative 2.321 million.
Thus, the value of the swap to the party paying sterling
is a negative amount--
negative 2.321 million dollars.
In part B, we're asked, what is the value
to the party paying dollars and receiving sterling?
Now, the easy way to answer this question is to notice that
since the cash flows here are reversed--
it's just the opposite leg of the swap--
the value of the swap to the party paying dollars
is the negative of the value to the party paying sterling.
And the negative of negative $2.321 million
is simply $2.321 million.
Now, the harder method for solving this question
that I alluded to above, is to view this swap as a portfolio
of forward contracts.
Now, how do we solve this using the hard method of viewing
the swap as a sequence of forward contracts?
Well, first to be consistent with part A,
we will value the swap to the party paying sterling
and receiving dollars.
So we should get an answer that's
very similar to part A. The first step is to note,
that since we're given annual interest rates,
and we need continuously compounded interest
rates in order to calculate the forward exchange
rates 3 and 15 months from now, we
can convert our annual interest rates into continuously
compounded interest rates by taking the natural log of 1
plus the annual interest rate expresses a decimal.
So for instance, for the continuously compounded
interest rate in sterling, we take
1 plus the 7% annual interest rate in sterling.
And the natural log of that is 6.766% per annum.
And similarly, the 4% annually compounded
interest rate in dollars expresses a decimal plus 1.
And take the natural log of that gives us 3.922% per annum.
So we have these two continuously compounded
interest rates.
What we need now is to find the forward exchange rates-- that
is the exchange rates in the future, 3 months and 15 months.
Well, the 3 month forward exchange rate
is equal to the current exchange rate, which is $1.55 per pound,
times the exponential of the difference in the continuously
compounded interest rates in dollars--
3.922% expressed as a decimal--
and in sterling-- 6.766% expressed as a decimal--
times an adjustment for 3 months in the future--
3 over 12, which is equal to 1.539.
Pretty close, but slightly below our current exchange
rate of 1.55.
Similarly, the 15 month forward exchange rate
is equal to the current exchange rate of dollars per pounds,
multiplied by the exponential of the difference
in the continuously compounded dollar and Sterling interest
rates.
But now, our adjustment is 15 over 12 for the discounting,
since this is the forward exchange
rate 15 months in the future.
That foreign exchange rate is 1.4959--
significantly less than the current exchange
rate of $1.55 per pound.
Now, given that we have the 3 month and 15 month forward
exchange rates, we can find the values
of the two forward contracts corresponding
to the exchange of fixed interests
for the party paying sterling and receiving dollars
as follows.
In the first equation, we have the difference
between the $1.8 million in fixed interest received
in 3 months, minus 2 times the 3 month forward exchange
rate of 1.539, discounted at the dollar
continuously compounded interest rate of 3.922% multiplied by 3
over 12, which is equal to a negative $1.256 million.
Now, the value of the forward contract corresponding
to the exchange of interest for the party paying sterling in 15
months is again $1.8 million, minus 2,
times the foreign exchange rate for 15 months 1.4959,
times the exponential of negative 0.3922,
again discounting at the 3.922% continuously compounded dollar
interest rate, times 15 over 12--
since we're now 15 months into the future, again,
so that's the 15 over 12 term--
which gives us a total value of negative $1.1347 million.
Now that we've found the value of the two forward contracts
corresponding to the exchange of fixed interest in 3 and 15
months according to the perspective of the party that
is paying sterling and receiving dollars,
we can find the value of the forward contract corresponding
to the exchange of principals as follows.
For then the perspective of the party that
is paying sterling and receiving dollars,
it's equal to the difference between the $30 million
principal and the 20 million pounds principal,
adjusted for the forward exchange rate 15 months
from now of 1.4959 dollars per pound,
discounted by the exponential of negative 0.3922--
remember, that's the decimal form
of the continuously compounded dollar interest rate--
times 15 over 12, for the fact that the exchange of principals
occurs at the terminal date of the swap 15
months in the future, which gives us
a total amount of $0.0787 million
for the value of the forward contract
corresponding to the exchange of principals.
So the total value of the swap according to the party
paying sterling is going to be the sum of three
different forward contracts: the two forward contracts
corresponding to the exchange of interest
in 3 months and 15 months that we found here--
the negative $1.2656 million, and negative $1.1347 million,--
plus the value of the forward contract corresponding
to the exchange of principals at the end of 15 months, which
is $0.0787 million, which gives us a total of negative $2.322
million.
Which, if you'll recall from part A,
according to some rounding errors,
is very close to that which we obtained using the bond
valuation method.
So that wraps up recitation two.
Thank you all for attending and I look forward
to seeing you next week.