PROFESSOR: After analyzing a firm's financing decision,
we now turn our attention to its payout policy.
Payout is one of the two major components
of corporate financial decisions,
the other being capital structure.
Its significance is reflected in many ways.
For example, dividend cuts by firms
can lead to severe declines in stock price.
On the other hand, maintaining stable payout
may prevent a firm from taking on valuable investments.
From the corporate finance perspective,
an important question is, can a firm
increase its value by optimally choosing its payout policy?
If yes, what factors will determine its optimal payout?
From the market perspective, investors also
respond to a firm's dividend policy.
If a firm deviates significantly from its desirable payout
policy, traditional investors may sell it.
In some cases, active investors may
try to change the firm's payout policy.
In the first part of this lecture,
we examine how a firm's payout policy may affect its value.
Payout policy refers to different ways
a firm can distribute its free cash flow to its shareholders.
As discussed in our analysis of common stocks
in part 1 of this course, a firm's free cash flow
is split into two parts--
retained and paid out.
This is illustrated by the figure on the slide.
Retained free cash flow, which is
shown on the left-hand side of the plot,
goes into either new investments or cash reserves.
The free cash flow for payout shown
on the right-hand side of the plot
goes to shareholders either through share repurchase
or cash dividend.
The trade-off between retaining and paying out
depends on the efficient use of cash
within the firm, such as financing positive NPV projects
now or in the near future, reducing excessive cash
to avoid misuse.
As mentioned above, there are two ways to pay out--
dividend and share repurchase.
We quickly review the mechanics for these two methods.
We start with dividend, which falls into two categories--
regular dividend and special dividend.
As the name suggests, regular dividend
refers to dividends that are paid regularly in time.
Special dividend refers to dividends paid only
under certain special circumstances such as winning
a big court case.
Other than its amount, several dates concerning a dividend
are important to note.
The first is the declaration date
on which the board of directors authorizes the dividend
payment.
Next is the record date.
When the firm pays a dividend, only shareholders
on the record of this date receive the dividend.
The next thing is the ex-dividend date,
which is a date two days before the record date due to the T+2
settlement in the US on or after which investors buying
the stock will not be eligible for the dividend.
The next date is the cum-dividend date.
And that's the trading day right before the ex-dividend date.
The final date is the distribution date.
That is a date typically within a month
after the record date on which the firm pays the dividend
to its registered shareholders.
Next, we consider share repurchase or buyback.
In particular, a firm can use cash
to buy its own shares outstanding.
The shares repurchased can either be retired or kept
as treasury stock available for reissuance in the future.
There are three ways to conduct share repurchase.
The first method is open market repurchase.
That is to buy shares in the open market at market prices.
About 95% of share repurchase are done this way.
The next method is tender offer.
In this case, the firm makes a public offer
to all existing shareholders to buy back
a given amount of outstanding shares at a prespecified price
usually 10% to 20% above the current market
price, over a given time window, typically 20 days.
The third method is targeted repurchase.
This is done through direct negotiation
with a major shareholder.