
PROFESSOR: Before we start examining the driving factors
behind firms' payout policies, let's
take a look at what they actually do.
As I said before, data always provide
useful empirical guidance and discipline for our analysis.
Below is a list of facts on dividends.
First, dividends are widespread.
Most Fortune 500 firms pay dividends.
Second, dividends are substantial.
About 50% to 60% of firms' after-tax profit
are paid in dividends.
Third, cash dividend is the main form of payout until recently.
Fourth, share repurchase has become more popular over time.
Five, high tax bracket individuals
receive most dividends.
Six, general payout policy patterns, which were first
provided by Lintner, include--
payout ratios are quite stable over the long run.
Managers worry more about changes,
rather than levels of dividends.
Dividend policies precede other decisions.
Firms even use outside funds to pay dividends, if needed.
Seven, stock price increases or decreases when dividends
are initiated or omitted.
In particular, we observe 3.7% at dividend initiation
and minus 7.0% at omission of dividends.
Survey of corporate executives also gives similar evidence.
The table on the slide shows their response
to the following question: do these statements
describe factors that affect your company's dividend
decisions?
A large majority of them expressed
the following preferences--
avoid cutting dividend, maintain smooth dividend.
Clearly, both executives and the market prefer smooth dividends.
This is reflected in the figure shown on this slide.
The x-axis is time from 1988 to 2008, over 20 years.
The y-axis shows the percentage of US firms
who experienced no change, increase,
and decrease in dividends, respectively, each year
during this period.
The green bar shows the percentage
of firms with no change in dividends in that year.
The blue bar shows the percentage
of firms with increase in dividends.
And the red bar shows the percentage
of firms with decrease in dividends in that year.
We see that, on average, about 65% of the firms
don't change their dividends.
About 30% increase their dividends.
And only about 5% decrease their dividends.
The data clearly shows that the majority of firms
keep their dividends stable.
In addition to looking at the aggregate pattern in dividends,
we can also look at the dividend policies of individual firms.
As an example, the figure on this slide
plots the dividend policy of General Motors, or GM,
from 1985 to 2008, over a time span of 23 years.
The x-axis is time.
The y-axis shows two quantities.
The red line plots GM's earnings per share,
and the blue line plots its dividend per share,
both on quarterly basis.
What's striking is that GM's earnings are very volatile,
while its dividend has been relatively smooth.
It has only adjusted dividends eight times during this time
period, although GM did cut its dividend in early 1990s
and after 2005 after large and persistent drops
in its earnings.
The dividend stays mostly constant,
while its earnings vary wildly.
This pattern is not unique.
It is pervasive, as Lintner pointed out early on.
A natural question is, why do firms behave in this way?
As mentioned earlier, stock buybacks
have become more popular as a method of payout.
The figure on this slide partially
illustrates this point.
Again, the x-axis is time from 1999 to 2019, over 20 years.
The green bar shows the total cash dividends
in billion dollars paid quarterly by S&P 500 firms.
The blue bar shows the total amount
of buybacks by these companies, also quarterly
and in billion dollars.
The red line shows the level of S&P 500 index.
Two trends seem to emerge from the plot.
First, over this time period buybacks have increased a lot
and is overtaking dividend as a more important mean
of payout in recent years.
Second, buybacks tend to be more correlated
with the level of the stock market,
while dividends tend to be much less.