PROFESSOR: We now turn to the analysis of payout policy.
As said before, the main question
is, how should a firm choose its payout policy?
We can also pose this question by a simple example.
Suppose that your firm has a total value of $42 per share
with $40 in fixed assets and $2 in cash.
Would you prefer to leave the $2 inside the firm
or to put it in your own pocket?
To answer this question, again, we'll start with the MM world.
That is there are no taxes or transaction costs, no frictions
in the financial market.
Then it follows directly from the MM irrelevance theorem
that, holding the firm's investment policy fixed,
payout policy does not affect stockholder wealth
or the total value of the firm.
Instead of deriving MM result mathematically, let
us illustrate it through an example.
Consider Gerron Corporation, a pharmaceutical company.
It has 10 million shares outstanding.
It expects a perpetual free cash flow of $48 million per year
starting from next year.
That's year one.
Gerron now has $20 million excess cash reserve.
It has no debt outstanding.
Its cost of capital is 12%.
The board is deciding how to pay out the excess cash
to its shareholders.
The board is considering the following payout options.
One is pay out as cash dividend.
The other is pay out the excess cash by a share repurchase.
From the information above, we have the following.
The excess cash is $20 million divided by 10 million shares.
And that is $2 per share.
Expected future dividend starting next year is $4.80 per
share forever.
The share price p before the payout is p equals 2--
it's the per share cash--
plus 4.8-- that's the per share future dividends--
divide by the cost of capital, which is 12%.
And that gives us $42.
Let's now consider the case of cash dividend.
First, we observe that after the current dividend,
shareholders will only be receiving
the firm's future free cash flow as dividends.
Therefore, the ex-dividend price of the stock is px--
that's the x dividend stock price--
equals the present value of future dividends.
And that equals 4.80.
That's the per share future dividend
divide by the cost of capital, which is 0.12.
And that gives us $40.
The cum-dividend price will then be
Pcum equals the current dividend plus the ex-dividend price.
And that is 2 plus 4.80 divided by 0.12.
And that equals 2 plus 40, and that's $42.
The table on this slide summarizes what is going on.
The second column gives the situation
of the firm cum-dividend.
In million dollars, the cash is $20.
The value of the fixed asset is $400.
The total market value is $420.
With the total number of shares being 10 million,
we have the share price to be $42.
The third column gives the situation ex-dividend.
Again, in million dollars, the cash
drops to zero after the dividend payment.
The value of the fixed asset is still $400 million.
The total market value is $400.
And the share price is now $40.
Clearly, the share price drops by the same amount
after the cash dividend, no more, no less.
Therefore, we can conclude that in the financial market
without frictions, paying a dividend does not
change the firm's value.
We now consider the case when the firm
does a share repurchase instead of cash dividend.
In other words, Gerron will use the $20 million
extra cash to buy back its shares on the open market.
With the initial share price of $42,
Gerron will repurchase 476,000 shares.
Here, if we use $20 million of cash
divided by the share price of $42,
that gives us 0.476 million shares.
This will leave 10 minus 0.476.
That equals 9.524 million shares outstanding.
The key is that the share price will remain unchanged
after the buyback.
The situation before and after the buyback
is given in the table.
The second column gives the situation
before the share repurchase.
In million dollars, the cash is $20, the value of fixed asset
$400, the total market value $420 same as before.
With 10 million shares outstanding,
the share price is $42.
The third column describes the situation
after the share repurchase.
In million dollars, cash drops to zero.
The value of fixed asset is still $400.
The total market value drops to $400.
With 9.524 million shares remaining,
the share price is $42.
It should not be surprising that the repurchase has no effect
on Gerron's stock price.
Let's double check.
After the repurchase, the future dividend
will rise to $5.04 per share.
This comes from the fact that the total earnings for the firm
is $48 million, and we have 9.524 million shares
outstanding.
The ratio of the two gives us $5.04 per share.
Gerron's share price then is p repurchase equals $5.04 divide
by the cost of capital, which is 12%.
That gives us $42.
We can conclude that in the perfect financial market,
an open market share repurchase has no effect
on the current stock price.
Moreover, this is the same price as the cum-dividend price
if a dividend was paid instead.
Through the example above, we arrive at the following result.
In the MM world, shifting dividend or payout over time
does not change firm value.
Higher current dividend reduces future dividends.
The former payout, for example, dividend or repurchase
does not change firm value.
Formally, we can state the MM payout irrelevance theorem
as follows.
In the financial market with no frictions, holding investment
policy fixed, a firm's payout policy
is irrelevant and does not affect the firm's value.
This result leads to several immediate implications.
First, paying dividends or buying back shares
is a zero NPV transaction.
Firm value before dividend simply equals firm value
after dividend plus the dividend.
Second, investor preferences do not matter.
In the market with no frictions, investors
are indifferent between the firm distributing funds
via dividends or repurchases.
By reinvesting dividends or selling shares,
the shareholders can replicate either payout method by
themselves.