
PROFESSOR: The MM insight about payout irrelevance
also helps us to avoid fallacies and illusions
about payout policy.
As an example, let's consider the bird-in-the-hand
hypothesis.
It argues that dividends are safer than future payments,
hence paying dividends puts money
in the hands of shareholders and will increase from value.
Is this correct?
Since both current and future payments are properly
valued by the market, the timing should not matter.
Having it in your account versus the firm's account
should not make a difference.
But if it's about potential misuse of cash
by the managers, which is a friction, then you may.
We will return to this issue a little bit later.
This example also shows that the MM insight leads
us to ask the right question.
How does a change in payout policy
alter the size of the pie?
This happens only when there are frictions.
The main frictions include taxes, asymmetric information,
agency problems.
We will consider them one at a time.
The first friction we consider is tax.
It's often the case that for different payoffs from equity,
like dividends and capital gain, they are taxed differently.
In particular, shareholders must pay taxes on dividends.
And they also pay taxes on capital gains
when they sell their shares, at least in the US.
Dividends are typically taxed at a higher
rate than capital gains.
Long-term investors can defer capital gains tax indefinitely
by not selling.
Tax code on dividends and capital gain
varies substantially across countries and over time.
The table on the slide shows the tax rates
on capital gains and dividends in the US from 1971 to 2018.
The first column gives the different time
windows during which the tax rates stay constant.
The second column gives the tax rate on capital gains
during these time windows.
It does change over time quite a bit.
The range is between 15% from 2003 to 2012 and 35%
from 1971 to 1978, which is quite substantial.
Since 2013, it's 20%, which is significant,
but at a relatively low level.
The third column in the table gives the marginal tax
rate on dividends.
Here, marginal means the highest tax bracket.
We first observe that there is a wide range in the tax
rate on dividends over this time period,
from 70% at the highest level to 15% at the lowest level
during this period of 48 years.
Next, there is an overall decreasing trend.
It was 70% in the 1970s, which is very high.
It dropped to around 40% in 1990s
and further decreased to 15% during 2003 to 2012.
It became 20% in 2013.
There is, however, no reason to suggest that this trend will
not be reversed.
Third, up until recently, there is a large spread
between the tax rates on capital gains and dividends.
Most of the time over this period, dividends
are taxed at a much higher rate than capital gains.
Only since 2003 the two tax rates became the same.
Given the tax environment, we can
arrive at some simple and intuitive predictions.
First, when the tax rate on dividends
is higher than the tax rate on capital gains,
shareholders will pay lower taxes
if the firm uses share repurchase rather than dividend
to pay out.
The tax savings will then increase
the value of the firm which uses share repurchase instead
of dividends.
Second, when a tax rate on dividends
is higher than a tax rate on capital gains,
the optimal payout policy is not to pay dividends.
The predictions above are broadly
consistent with the data we have seen.
Dividend payments are declining on average
over the past 30 years, while the user repurchases
has increased.
However, they cannot fully explain why firms were paying
dividends, even when a tax rate on them was very high.
This suggests that other factors may also be at play.
The figure on this slide provides
more empirical background for this issue.
The x-axis shows the time span from 1975 to 2015,
a total of 40 years.
The y-axis shows the percentage of share repurchases
in total payout.
Over this time period, there is a substantial increase
in the use of share repurchase in payout.
Its share in total payout started at below 5% in 1975.
By 1997, its share has exceeded 50%.
After the cut in dividend tax in 2003,
the trend has more or less stabilized.
The share of repurchase in total payout
has been fluctuating around 60% since then.
Dividends, however, still take up 40% of the total payout.
This general empirical pattern under the current code
presents a so-called dividend puzzle.
Why do firms continue to pay dividends
despite their tax disadvantage?