
PROFESSOR: The dividend puzzle has several aspects.
First, we know that at the corporate level,
dividends are not tax-exempt, while interests are.
At the personal level, dividends are
taxed at the same rate as interests, at least
before 2003.
Therefore, why pay dividends when interest payments
are tax-exempt?
Why pay cash dividend instead of share repurchase?
Possible explanations include transaction costs,
such as selling small amounts of shares is costly,
the signaling hypotheses, the free cash flow hypotheses.
We'll briefly explore these possibilities--
in particular, the last two.
The signaling hypotheses for dividends goes as follows.
There is asymmetric information between the market
and firm's managers.
In particular, managers know about the prospects
of their own firms, good or bad.
But the market does not have this information.
In this situation, firms with good prospects
want to reveal this information to the market.
By paying dividends, which is costly,
they are signalling this information to the market.
Firms with bad prospects, however,
cannot afford to mimic the good firms.
For example, if future earnings are low,
which is more likely for bad firms,
they will need to raise outside funds for good investments,
which incurs transaction or information costs, or even
forego these projects.

The financial market does interpret
unanticipated dividend changes as signals about the firm's
future prospects.
For example, on average, the stock price
drops 3.7% for large dividend cuts
and rises 1.3% for large dividend increases.
Although the second hypotheses is intuitive,
it faces some questions.
For example, given how costly dividends
are, at least to shareholders, why don't firms
use repurchase to signal?
Also, given that firms don't change their dividends often,
how can dividend policy be an effective signal?
If anything, can dividends be a signal about risk?
Another possible explanation for a firm's dividend policy
is the so-called free cash flow hypotheses.
Its basic argument goes as follows.
First, excess cash can lead to agency problems,
such as empire building-- that is,
managers take on projects not in the best interest
of shareholders--
or perks.
Second, paying out excess cash prevent
wasting money on bad projects.
In particular, dividend is a way to get money
out of manager's hands back to shareholders.
Despite its appeal, there are, however, a few caveats
about this hypotheses.
For example, dividends are discretionary--
hence, not a strong mechanism to get money out.
Interest payment on debt is a stronger commitment.
The firm has to pay its debt holders.
Nevertheless, investors do expect dividends to be smooth.
The discussion above also suggests
that frictions, like asymmetric information and agency cost,
can also contribute to the other corporate financial decisions,
such as capital budgeting and financing.
The underlying mechanisms are similar in spirit
to the ones we have discussed above for payout.
For example, leverage can also be a tool
to mitigate agency problems, like mentioned above,
in addition to its tax benefit.
To summarize, frictions, like asymmetric information
and agency costs, are prevalent in corporate finance.
It is quite compelling to think that they
can have significant impact on the firm's financial decisions.
It's also fairly easy to come up with various hypotheses,
like the ones discussed above, to explain or predict
firm behavior.
Nonetheless, these hypotheses also have their challenges.
For example, is their impact significant enough
to explain the first-order phenomena, like dividend
or capital structure?
Here, we are talking about a substantial fraction
of the firm's total value that can be gained or lost.
If the answer is yes, then what is preventing firms
from coming up with effective ways,
such as proper incentives for the managers, to overcome them?
We leave these issues as more advanced topics
beyond the scope of this course.