
PROFESSOR: Our next and last topic on corporate finance
is risk management.
It goes without saying that firms face all kinds of risks
from all the items on the asset side, which is business risk,
and the liability side, which is financial risk.
The basic question we ask here is what, if anything,
should a firm do to deal with these risks?
A firm's action in dealing with its risks
primarily through financial means
is also referred to as corporate risk management.
Our discussion on corporate risk management
consists of four parts.
First, we will provide a conceptual framework
for risk management in general.
Second, we will consider the firm's risk management policy
under MM, that is in absence of market frictions.
Next, we examine how frictions may influence a firm's risk
management policy.
Finally, we illustrate how to utilize
the different financial instruments to implement
various risk management strategies.
We will start with the simple framework for risk management.
As learned in part 1 of this course,
we divide risks into two types.
The first type is factor or market risks.
The factors include commodity prices, interest rates,
exchange rates, other market factors
such as the stock market, macroeconomy, inflation.
The second type is idiosyncratic risks.
These are risks specific to a firm or a project.
And they can be diversified.
Depending on the types of risks, the method used to manage them
is also different.
In general, there are three methods.
For factor risks, the method is hedging,
which involves trading in financial contracts or assets
to reduce or transfer risk.
For idiosyncratic risks, there are two methods.
One is diversification, which involves trading
real assets to reduce risk.
The other is insurance, which involves
trading insurance or financial contracts to reduce or transfer
risk.
Potentially, a firm's risk management
can involve all the three methods
in dealing with the different types of risks.
Our analysis, however, will mainly
focus on how a firm should manage or hedge
its exposures to factor risks.
This is a narrow definition of risk management.
As said above, in general, you should also
include the management of idiosyncratic risks.
Nonetheless, the basic ideas we develop here
can also be applied to the general situation.
In dealing with factor or market risks,
we can use instruments in the financial market.
Since these instruments involve little transaction costs
and other frictions, the corresponding strategies
are also relatively easy to implement.
For risk management, the two basic questions are,
should a firm hedge its risk?
That is, can hedging increase firm value?
Next, if the firm decides to hedge a particular risk,
how to do it?
We take on these two questions sequentially.