
INSTRUCTOR: Regarding the question
about whether a firm should hedge,
we make the following observations.
First, hedging involves only transactions
in the financial market at market prices.
Therefore, under the conditions of MM,
that is there's no frictions in the financial market,
hedging has no impact on firm value.
In particular, the no frictions condition
assumes no taxes, no transaction costs or constraints
in the financial market, equal access to the financial market
for shareholders and managers, same information
for shareholders and managers, no cost of financial distress.
The logic of the MM irrelevance result is the same as before.
Managers cannot create value by making financial transactions
that shareholders can do on their own.
In the MM world, whatever risks a firm takes on,
the shareholders can manage these risks by themselves
according to their own preferences.
For example, shareholders can hedge market risks
by trading in the same set of instruments.
They can diversify idiosyncratic risks more easily than the firm
by holding a diversified portfolio.
They can buy the same set of insurance contracts
to avoid idiosyncratic risks.
Another way to articulate the MM insight
is that in absence of superior information,
transactions in the financial market are zero NPV activities.
Of course, frictions can change the picture.
A firm should manage its risk if it increases firm value.
This can happen in the presence of frictions.
In particular, if hedging can reduce taxes,
managers have better hedging opportunities than shareholders
such as facing smaller transaction costs, lower
capital requirements, managers have better information
on the firm's exposures, hedging can
reduce cost of financial distress,
hedging can help to reduce agency costs between managers
and shareholders, and between shareholders and debt holders.
We use an example to illustrate how
market frictions may allow risk management to create value
for a firm.
Let's consider the example of 415inc in lecture 18.
The basic situation is as follows.
For more details, you can refer to lecture 18.
415inc has asset of a current value of $100 million,
which is 100% equity financed.
The asset value next year will be either 120 or 100,
with equal probabilities.
The risk-free rate is 5%.
The risk-neutral probability for the upstate is a quarter.
415inc intends to issue a debt with the par value of 80
at a promise yield of y, with a tax rate of 30%,
and distress cost of C times the total default amount
squared, where C equals 1 over 320,
the optimal promised yield is 45%.
The leverage creates a tax shield of 10.8 and 6
in the upper and down state, respectively.
Default occurs in the down state with interest payment of 100
over 80 minus one, that's 25%.
The default amount is 80, that's the principal times 45%, which
is the promised yield minus 25%.
The key information is summarized
in the table on the slide.
With the risk-neutral probability and risk-free rate,
we can price the leverage effect,
which is given by PVTS minus PVDC, that
equals 1/4 times 10.8, that's the tax shield in the upstate,
plus 3/4 the relationship probability for downstate times
6, that's the tax credit in the downstate,
minus 0.8, that's the default cost.
Divide that by 1 plus the risk free rate
of 5%, that gives us 6.29.
The firm value with leverage effect
is then 100, that's the value of the asset, plus 6.29.
That gives us 106.29.
Suppose that 415inc enters into the following financial
contract to hedge its default risk.
The contract pays $1 in the down state and minus $3
in the upstate in year one.
Given the risk-neutral probability
and the risk-free rate, its current price
should be minus 3, that's the payoff in upstate times 1/4,
that's the risk-neutral probability for the upstate.
Then plus 1, that's the payoff in a downstate times 3/4,
that risk neutral probability for the downstate.
Divide it again by 1 plus the risk free rate
of 5%, that gives us zero.
This is like a forward or swap contract
with the current price of zero.
Future payoffs differently in different states.
With the hedge, 415inc will receive $1
from the contract in the default state.
It can use this to increase its payment to the debt holders.
The actual interest payment now becomes
101 divided by 80, the principal amount, minus 1.
That gives us 26.25%.
This is still below the promised 45%.
The default still occurs, but it increases the total interest
payment in a down state which creates more tax shield
and decreases the default amount, which
reduces the distress cost.
The key cash flows with the hedge
are given in the table on the slide.
In particular, the tax shield in the down state
is now 6.3 higher than 6 without the hedge.
The distress cost is now 0.7031, which is lower than eight
without the hedge.
If we now look at leverage effect with the hedge,
its total value is given as follows.
PVTS minus PVDC equals 1/4 times 10.8,
that's for the upstate same as before,
plus 3/4, the risk-neutral probability for downstate,
times 6.3, the tax credit, minus 0.7031,
that's the default cost.
And then, divide by 1 plus the 5% risk-free rate.
Finishing the calculation, we get 6.57.
Clearly, firm value is now 100 plus 6.57, that's 106.5,
with the hedge.
This is higher than its value without the hedge.
In this case, hedging adds value in two ways.
First, it increases tax shield in a downstate,
and second, it reduces distress costs in the downstate.
In the analysis above, we did not try to optimize the hedge.
If there are no other costs and constraints,
415inc should do more of the hedge
to further increase value.
But our purpose here is merely to demonstrate the point, that
is, in the presence of frictions,
in this case taxes and distress caused,
hedging can increase firm value by helping
to overcome the negative impact of frictions.
Our general point is that when it
comes to the question about whether to hedge,
we need to first identify frictions
that have negative effects on firm value,
and then consider if reducing certain risks by hedging
can help to mitigate these effects.