
PROFESSOR: We now turn our attention
to how to execute a risk management strategy
if the firm chooses one.
We will start with a discussion on the basic idea
behind hedging and then consider a series of examples
on its application in various situations.
As I said earlier, a firm is exposed to different market
or factor risks from both its asset and liability side.
For example, an airliner's profit
is exposed to oil price risk.
An increase in oil price will negatively impact its profit.
The firm can use market instruments
to reduce these risks.
In the above example, the airliner
can reduce its exposure to oil price risk
by buying oil forwards or futures.
Such an operation in the case of the airline example
is called hedging.
The basic idea is to take on additional positions whose
gains and losses can offset at least partially the gains
and losses from the original position where
market prices change.
To consider this more formally, we introduce some notation.
Let V original denote the value of the original position, which
is unhedged, V hedging denote the value of the hedging
instrument or hedging vehicle, V net
denote the value of the hedged position.
As market or factor prices change,
the values of these positions also change.
In particular, we have the delta v
net, the change in value of the net position,
equals delta v original plus hedge ratio times
delta of v hedging.
The hedging is perfect under two conditions.
First, delta v original and delta v hedging
are perfectly correlated.
Second, hedge ratio is appropriately chosen.
In the case of perfect hedge, the risk
can be completely avoided or hedged away.
Otherwise, the hedging is imperfect.
Next, we will consider several common risks firms face
and how to hedge them.
Many firms face commodity price risks.
We use an example to illustrate possible hedging
strategies against these risks.
Suppose that you are managing an oil exploration company
and have just found oil.
You expect to have one million barrels of oil in five months.
Given the high volatility of oil prices,
there is high uncertainty about what the oil
price will be in five months.
And you would like to hedge this risk.
There are various ways you can do this.
One is to use forwards on oil.
Another is to use oil futures.
Let's first consider how to use oil forwards to hedge.
You can hedge your position by selling forward
one million barrels of oil today.
Let St be the spot oil price at time t in months.
Then for each barrel of oil, we can list positions and payoffs
in the table on the slide.
The first column lists the positions,
and the second column gives their payoffs in month five.
The original position is a long position in one barrel of oil.
Its payoff at t equals 5 is simply
S5, the spot oil price then.
The hedging position in this case is short one barrel of oil
in forwards.
Its payoff at t equal to 5 is F minus S5
where F is the current forward price for oil
for maturity in five months.
The last row in the second column
gives the net payoff of the hedged position
or the net position.
It is F, the current forward price, which is certain.
In this case, the value of the original position
is perfectly correlated with the value of the hedging
instrument, which is an oil forward with matching maturity.
Short the forwards with the hedge ratio of delta equal to 1
yields a perfect hedge.
The firm is able to lock in the value of the original position
at the current forward price F.
There are several drawbacks from trading forwards as we
discussed in the lecture on forwards and futures.
One is its lack of liquidity, and the other
is counterparty risk.
For example, suppose that after one month,
you discover that there's no oil.
Then you no longer need the forward contract.
In fact, if you hang on to the forward contract,
you will be exposed to the risk of a short position in oil.
In this case, you want to unwind your position
by buying back the contract.
Given the lack of liquidity for forward contracts,
this can be difficult and expensive.
In order to avoid liquidity problems with forwards,
you can use oil futures as the hedging instrument.
Let us continue with the example above.
You can sell one million barrels of oil in the futures market.
Suppose the size of each oil futures contract
is 1,000 barrels of oil.
The number of contracts you want to sell
or short is given by the following equation--
one million barrels, which is your total exposure,
divide by 1,000.
That's the contract size.
And that gives us 1,000 contracts.
As we know, the futures contracts
can be easily bought and sold in the market.
If in one month you want to unwind your position,
you can simply sell these contracts in the market.
Futures are easy to trade and bear little counterparty risk.
But they have their own limitations.
First, since futures contracts are standardized by exchanges,
they may not perfectly match the firm's hedging need.
Often, we find the following mismatches
between the original position and the futures
as a hedging vehicle.
First is mismatch in maturity.
For example, futures contracts typically
have short maturities in months while our exposure
can be for much longer term, say, in years.
The second is mismatch in size.
Since we cannot trade in fractional contracts,
the hedging position can only approximate our exposure with
raw contract numbers.
The third mismatch is in underlying assets.
The underlying asset for the futures contract
often is not identical to the underlying
asset of our original exposure.
For example, oil from Texas--
this is the underlying asset for oil futures, NYMEX.
It is not the same as oil from the Middle East.
Therefore, a perfect hedge using futures
is achievable only when first, the maturity of the futures
matches the timing of the cash flow
from the original position.
Second, the contract size matches
that of the original position.
And third, the cash flow being hedged
is linearly related to that of the futures.
When there's a mismatch in any of these dimensions
between the original position and the futures contract,
the hedge will not be perfect.
In the case of an imperfect hedge,
we have to realize that although hedging partially
reduces the risk of the original position,
it may also pick up additional risks from the hedging
position.
There is another practical issue we
want to mention when using futures to hedge.
That is while futures are liquid to trade,
they do carry the liquidity risk from mark-to-market.
Let's again use the example above to illustrate.
Suppose that we have an oil well whose market
value is AT, which will change with oil price proportionally.
To reduce risk, we can take on an offsetting position
in oil futures, say, by selling oil futures.
Suppose that the hedge is almost perfect.
As the oil price falls, AT declines.
But the short position in futures
will make money, which offsets the losses
from the original position.
As the oil price rises, we gain value on AT
but incur losses from the hedge.
In terms of market value, we are breaking even
immune to the oil price risk.
However, marking to market our futures position
requires an immediate cash outflow.
The gain in the value of the well
comes from higher cash flows in the future.
The mismatch in the timing of these two cash flows
gives rise to a liquidity need.
We have to come up with funds to meet the margin requirements
right away.
Normally, this can be done by using the firm's cash reserves
or borrowing against future cash flows.
But what happens if the firm is financially constrained?
You will then face a liquidity crunch.
This example shows that mark-to-market for futures
may expose the firm to an additional liquidity risk which
is not present originally.
The firm needs to understand and manage
this risk well when using futures as hedging instruments.
There have been many examples where firms were
burned by this liquidity risk.