
PROFESSOR: Interest rate is another important market
risk firms face.
When interest rates change over time,
the discount rates on most assets also change,
which will then change the values of most assets.
We now develop the basic techniques
in managing this risk using the tools we
have developed in our Fixed Income lecture
in part 1 of this course.
To be simple, we will start with a fixed income position
as the original position.
This can be an actual fixed income asset
or a stream of safe cash flows.
This position will be exposed to the interest rate risk
as interest rates change over time.
To hedge this risk, we can take another fixed income position
to offset the interest rate risk of the original position.
The goal is to reduce the interest rate risk
of the total on that position.
For tractability, we will assume a flat term structure
for interest rates.
Let's consider a bond portfolio which
consists of nA units of Bond A and nB units of Bond B.
The data of Bond A and Bond B are given
in the table on the slide.
As shown by the second row in the table,
Bond A has a price of BA, a duration of DA,
and a modified duration of MDA.
The third row gives Bond B's price BB, duration DB,
and modified duration MDB, respectively.
As we have learned in part 1 of this course,
the modified duration measures the interest rate risk
of each bond.
The value of the portfolio is then
given by VP equals VA plus VB.
That equals nA times BA plus nB times BB.
When interest rate changes, the value of the portfolio
changes as follows.
Delta VP equals delta VA plus delta VB,
which reflects the changes in value of each
of the pieces in the portfolio.
That can be written as nA times delta BA
plus nB times delta BB.
That equals minus VA times MDA plus VB times MDB.
We then have the modified duration
for the portfolio, which is given by MDP equals VA divided
by VA plus VB times MDA plus VB divided
by VA plus VB times MDB.
It's simply the value weighted average
of the modified duration of the different pieces
in the portfolio.
MDP, then, gives the measure of interest rate
risk for the whole portfolio.
We can apply the above interest rate risk analytics
to construct hedging strategies against interest rate risks.
We illustrate the method using a simple example.
Suppose that you have a long position
in a four-year government bond and you
want to use a three-year government bond to hedge
the interest rate risk.
The data on the two bonds are given in a table on the slide.
Given in the second row, the three-year bond has a yield
to maturity of 10%, a duration of 2.75,
and a modified duration of 2.50.
Given in the third row, the four-year bond has a yield
to maturity of 10%--
same as the three-year bond since the yield curve is flat--
a duration of 3.52, and modified duration of 3.20.
In order to hedge the interest rate
risk of a long position in four-year bonds,
we need to short, or sell, three-year bonds.
The question is, how much?
For each dollar worth of the four-year bond,
let's short delta dollars of the three-year bond
such that the total portfolio has zero volatility, which
means modified duration here.
This gives us the first equation on the slide,
that is MD4 minus delta times MD3 equals 0.
Solving for the hedge ratio delta,
we have delta equals MD4 divided by MD3, that is,
3.20 divided by 2.50.
And that gives us 1.28.
This implies that for each dollar of the four-year bond
we need to short $1.28 of the three-year bond.
For the hedge portfolio, the interest rate risk
is close to zero.
The table on the slide shows what
happens when interest rate increases by 0.1%.
The first column describes the different positions,
and the second column gives the change in their values.
The second row is for a long position
of $1,000 in a four-year bond, our original position.
The change in its value is minus $3.20.
The third row is for the short position
in the three-year bond of $1,280, the hedging position.
The change in its value is plus $3.20.
The last row describes the net or the hedged position.
Its value changed by 0 to the first order of yield change.
Indeed, we have a perfect hedge to the first order
of interest rate changes.