
PROFESSOR: We have spent a great deal of effort
to understand how the financial market values different assets,
real or financial.
In particular, we have learned how
the time value of money and the risk premium
are provided by the prices of a rich set of traded
assets in the financial market.
These pricing information provides the basis for us
to value different assets, projects, and prospects
in real economic activities.
We have also developed methods and models
to analyze and measure risks.
In particular, we have learned that there
are two kinds of risks, systematic risks
and nonsystematic risks.
More importantly, it is the systematic risk
that leads to a required risk premium by the market.
Using risk models like the APT and the CAPM
we can further pin down the systemic risk factors
and their risk premiums.
We can then determine the risk premium of an asset
by its exposure to the systematic risks.
In addition, when an asset's risk
is nonlinear, such as in the case of options,
we have further developed option valuation or state price
valuation tools to price them accordingly.
What we will return to next is to apply
the risk analysis and valuation tools
as well as various financial instruments
available in the financial market
to help us make and implement corporate financial decisions.
As we have discussed in part 1 of this course,
corporate financial decisions fall into four categories.
The first is about real investments,
or capital budgeting, namely, what projects to invest in.
This decision involves estimates of an investment's cash flow,
the appropriate discount rates in valuing the cash flow,
and possible optionality embedded in it.
The second category of decisions is financing.
Financing decisions is about how a firm should raise
funds for its investments--
by issuing different types of financial claims,
bank loans, corporate bonds, stocks, et cetera.
The third is payout.
That is, how a firm should pay its shareholders
in terms of dividends, stock buybacks, and so on.
The fourth category is risk management,
how a firm should deal with various types of risks
it faces.
We covered in detail the first part of capital budgeting,
focusing primarily in cash flow analysis.
In this part of the course, we will
consider the remaining parts of capital budgeting
and the other three types of corporate financial decisions.
Again, we will start with a firm's investment or capital
budgeting decisions.
As we discussed before, the investment decision
is about the valuation of the projects under consideration.
In particular, we should follow the NPV rule.
That is, for a single project, we
should take it only if its cash flow has a positive Net Present
Value.
For multiple independent projects,
we should take all the projects with positive NPVs.
For mutually exclusive projects, we
should take the one with the highest NPV,
assuming it's also positive.
Therefore, the capital budgeting decision
really boils down to estimating the projects' NPVs.
The NPV of a project depends on three factors.
The first is its cash flow.
The second is the appropriate discount rates
for its cash flow.
And the last is the potential optionality
embedded in the project.
We have examined item one in detail
in part 1 of this course.
We will now focus on item two and three
with the risk analysis and asset pricing tools
we have developed.