
PROFESSOR: From our previous discussions in part one
and earlier in part two of this course,
we have established the following results
about the appropriate discount rates for a project.
A project's discount rate or the required rate of return or cost
of capital is the expected rate of return
demanded by the financial market or investors
in the financial market for the project
or traded assets in the market with a similar timing and risk
characteristics.
Therefore, a project's discount rate
is tied to the timing and risk of its cash flow.
Consequently, the discount rate is usually
different for different projects.
Simply because the timing and the risk of their cash flows
can be quite different.
An important implication of these results
is that, in general, it's incorrect to use
a firm wide cost of capital to discount
cash flows from different projects the firm faces.
What is the discount rate of a project, then?
In the simplest case, a single discount rate
can be used for all pieces of the cash flow from the project.
This case corresponds to the situation
where the term structure of discount rates is flat.
Although we often use this case in our examples
and computations, this is true only under very restrictive
conditions.
In the general case, different discount rates
are needed for different pieces of the project's cash flow.
This arises for two reasons.
First, the term structure of interest rates
is in general not flat.
That is, the time value of money for the market
is not constant for different time horizons.
This implies that even for risk free cash flows,
the discount rate is in general different
depending on the timing.
Second, different pieces of a cash flow in general
have different risks.
Consequently, their risk premiums will be different.
We now consider the discount rate of a project.
For simplicity, let's assume a single discount
rate is sufficient.
A projects' required rate of return, or discount rate,
is determined by systematic risk.
For concreteness, let's assume that the CAPM
holds in determining an asset's systematic risk
and the corresponding risk premium.
Then, the project's required rate of return
is given by its beta.
That is, R bar the expected rate of return on the project,
it should equal to rf, which is risk free rate, plus the beta
of the project times the risk premium on the market
portfolio, that is R bar m minus rf.
Therefore, if we know the project's beta, not the firm's
beta, its discount rate can be easily determined by the CAPM.

How do we determine the project's beta?
Well, we consider three scenarios or approaches.
The first is to find comparable pure play
companies traded in a market and use their betas.
That is, to use the market information.
The second scenario approach is to find comparable projects
and use their cash flows to estimate beta.
This approach uses cash flow information.
If we don't have any one of the above,
then we will need to use fundamental analysis
and judgment to guesstimate the project's beta.
And this approach uses fundamental information.
We will rely mostly on the first approach,
as it is often the most applicable and reliable.
We will demonstrate this approach
by considering an example.
Suppose that Berkshire Hathaway, an investment company,
is thinking about getting into a new business in oil and gas.
It needs to evaluate the NPV of the cash flow
from this business.
We assume that CAPM holds.
Then, Berkshire Hathaway's assets have a beta of 0.48.
What should it use as the cost of capital
for this new business?
First, Berkshire Hathaway should not
use the beta or required rate of return
on its assets to value the cash from an energy business.
As we know, Berkshire's assets represent
a very diverse portfolio ranging from financial firms,
like Bank of America, Wells Fargo, and American Express,
to consumer brands, like Coca-Cola and Kraft Heinz,
to tech companies like Apple.
These assets have quite different risk characteristics
or betas as the energy sector.
Berkshire should use the beta of an energy company,
or even better, a company concentrating on oil and gas.
One example is ConocoPhillips, whose business
is mostly in gas and oil.
How about Exxon, another energy company?
As it turns out, ExxonMobil has a more diverse business
portfolio.
It is less of a pure play in gas and oil, as we'll see later.
This slide shows ConocoPhillips percentage share
of revenue from its business portfolio at the end of 2019.
As we can see, oil and natural gas consist
of 87% of its business, including natural gas liquids
will increase the share to 96%.
That is, ConocoPhillips is mostly a pure play
company in oil and gas.
The plots at the bottom of the slide
also show the performance of ConocoPhillips stock
over the past 10 years.
It's been quite unimpressive to put it mildly.
Nonetheless, we can use the returns
on ConocoPhillips' stock and bond
to estimate the beta of its assets, which are primarily
oil and gas.
It turns out to be 0.77.
Using a risk free rate of 5% and a market risk premium of 6%,
we can obtain the required rate of return for Conoco,
which is the expected rate of return of the project, that's
equal to rF, the risk free rate, plus the beta
of the project, that's 0.77, times the market premium, which
is R bar on the market minus the risk free rate.
If we put in numbers, that should equal to 0.05
plus 0.77 times 0.06, which is the market premium.
Finishing that calculation, we get 9.62%
for the cost of capital of Conoco,
which should also be the cost of capital
for the project, which is going to be
in the same line of business.

Before we settle on the number for the cost of capital,
a few more comments are in order.
First, we need to be mindful about the quality
of these estimates, including the estimates
for the beta, the risk free rate, and the market premium.
For example, the beta estimates may be noisy.
Second, estimates are only approximations to reality.
For example, beta estimates can be changing over time.
Does this reflect a time varying beta
instead of an estimation error?
If so, can we still use beta estimates from past data
to approximate for future data in obtaining cost of capital,
which is forward looking?
It will also be desirable to have a sense about how good
the approximations are.
For example, CAPM is a model aimed
at capturing systematic risks and risk premium.
It's at best a reasonable approximation for reality.
Is it a good enough approximation?
How much can we ignore the other possible risk factors?

We don't have readily available fixes to fully resolve
the issues raised above.
Nonetheless, it is important to be
aware of the potential limitations of the estimates
approximations and models when applying them.
Understanding these limitations will also
help to come up with possible remedies
when we need to overcome these limitations.
Here, I would also like to bring up an important point
in obtaining an asset's expected rate of return, which is also
related to the discussion above.
Given that we have identified ConocoPhillips
as a company with similar assets as the new business
under consideration, why don't we
just use the past returns on Conoco's assets, which
are traded in the market in the form of its stock and bond
to directly estimate its expected rate of return?
This way, we won't need to rely on an asset pricing
model like the CAPM.
One major reason for not relying on a return estimate
based on past returns is that the estimate is often
very noisy.
As we have seen from the previous slide,
the performance of Conoco's stock over the 2010
to 2020 period is almost flat.
We probably don't believe that the expected rate
of return on Conoco's stock is close to zero.
The reason why we may not want to use an asset's past returns
to estimate its expected return is in part
because the returns are very volatile or noisy.
This is particularly true if we use a relatively short history,
although 10 years in the case of Conoco
above is not that short for most companies.
Even if we have a long history on a company or an industry,
its expected return may well be changing over time.
And the past data from the very distant history
may not be very relevant in estimating
its future expected return.
However, estimating beta can be more accurate.
For example, we can use more frequent data on returns
to obtain better estimates for beta.
In other words, in the context of certain asset pricing
models, like the CAPM, it is easier
to estimate risks than expected returns.
In this case, we can choose to follow the model using
the more accurate risk estimates to obtain
an estimate for the required rate of return
for individual assets assuming we
have good estimates for market risk premiums.
As mentioned before, to obtain the cost of capital
for oil and gas business, we can also
look at ExxonMobil, which has a large share
of its business in oil and gas.
The figure on the slide shows ExxonMobil's earnings mix.
As we can see, 83% of ExxonMobil's earnings
are from oil and other upstream products,
like liquid natural gas.
However, the remaining 17% are from the downstream products
like fuels, lubes, and chemicals.
The risk of downstream products are
different from that of upstream products.
Therefore, ExxonMobil is less of a pure play in oil and gas
than ConocoPhillips.
This is why we use ConocoPhillips.
What happens if we cannot find pure play companies?
In that case, we will try to find companies
with a small number of business lines in their portfolios.
We can first estimate the betas of the portfolios
and then use portfolio analytics to back out the betas of each
of the pieces.