
PROFESSOR: As discussed before, given an asset or its cash
flow, discount rates over different time horizons
are, in general, different.
In this part of our discussion, we
would like to better understand the underlying reasons for this
and how to deal with it.
The term structure of discount rates arises for two reasons.
First, the term structure of interest rates.
That is, the market gives different interest
rates for different horizons.
One year interest rate is, in general, different
from the 10 year interest rate.
This simply reflects the different rates of return
the market expects for save cash flows
at different future dates.
In our analysis of the fixed income
market in part one of this course,
we also discussed the underlying factors influencing
the interest rate curve.
Here, for our purpose, we will take the interest rate curve
as given.
The second reason is that the term structure
of risk premium for a given asset or cash flow
is, in general, not flat either.
This can come from two sources.
The first is that the risk of the cash flow,
in particular, the systematic risk,
can be different for the different pieces of the cash
flow at different dates.
The second is that the corresponding risk
premium can also differ.
Therefore, a sufficient condition
for flat term structure of discount rates
is that the term structure of interest rates is flat
and also the term structure of risk premiums is flat as well.
In general, these two conditions are hard to satisfy.
In what follows, we further consider under what
conditions we may get a flat term
structure for risk premiums.
It heavily depends on how risks accumulate
over time for the asset or project
and how the price of risk varies with the time horizon.
We do so by considering an example.
Suppose that the CAPM holds and the risk premium on the market
portfolio is 8%, the risk free rate
is 4%, both constant over time and over different time
horizons.
Therefore, the market's time value for money and price
of risk have a flat term structure.
We only focus on how the risk of an asset's cash flow
may vary over different time horizons.
Let's suppose that we are now in year zero
and consider a financial contract which
pays a cash flow in two years, that is, year two.
The cash flow CF2 is given by the ratio
between the value of S&P 500 index in year two
and its value in year one.
Ignoring dividends and assume that S&P 500 index represents
the market portfolio.
This ratio is simply the gross rate
of return on the market portfolio in year two.
That is, 1 plus RM2.
The question for us is, what should the current price
of this cash flow be?
Let's consider this step by step.
First, let's try to find its price in year one.
That is, the present value of CF2 in year one.
The expected value of CF2 in year one
is simply 1 plus the expectation in year one of RM2,
which is return on the market in year two.
Where the expectation is taken year one.
This is also just 1 plus R bar on the market.
That's expected gross rate of return on the market portfolio.
Here, as usual, we assume the returns on the market portfolio
are RID over time.
In order to obtain its present value in year one,
we need the right discount rate.
Since the cash flow has the same risk as the market portfolio,
it's required rate of return should
be the same as the market portfolio.
Putting the two pieces together, the present value
of CF2 in year one is simply its expected value,
which is 1 plus R bar M discounted at the markets
expect of rate of return, which is also R bar M. It, then,
will give us $1 for sure.
In other words, the price of this cash flow in year one
is simply $1 with no uncertainty.
This should not be surprising.
If we have $1 in year one for sure,
we can easily invest it in the market portfolio for one year
and then obtain 1 plus RM2, which is CF2.

Next, we need to find the present value of this cash flow
now, that is, in year zero.
This should be straightforward given
that the value of CF2 in year one is $1 with no uncertainty.
The right discount rate should be the risk free rate,
which is 4%.
Writing this out, we have the first equation
that is PV0 equals $1 discounted at 4%, which gives us
96.15 cents.
The second equation on the slide further
expresses the present value at time 0
in terms of the expected value of CF2 discounted back
over the two periods, year one and year two.
What we see from the second equation
is that the discount rates for the two periods are different.
It is RBM for the second period and RF for the first period.
The reason for two discount rates
is that CF2 is risky only during period two,
not during period one.
This example tells us that in order
to have the same risk adjusted discount rates for both periods
the cash flow will need to bear risks in both periods
and in certain ways.
We demonstrate this last point also by an example.
We now consider another financial contract,
which pays in two years a cash flow that
equals the ratio between the S&P 500 index then
and its value today.
It's cash flow, CF2, can also be written
as the product of the gross returns of S&P 500 index
over year one and year two.
That is, CF2 equals S&P year two divided by S&P in year zero
and equals the product of the gross return
on the market over these two years.
Clearly, CF2 is risky.
Its risk is related to the market risk
in both year one and year two.
This differs from the previous contract
whose risk is only related to the market risk in year two.
Let us now try to value this cash flow.
Again, we start at year one.
The present value of CF2 in year one
is given by the following discounted cash flow formula.
The numerator is the expected value of CF2 in year one.
It is simply the gross return on the market over year one.
That is, 1 plus RM1, which is known in year one times
the expected gross return on the market over year two, which
is 1 plus E1 of RM2.
The denominator is 1 plus the appropriate discount rate.
Since the cash flow has the same risk as the market,
the discount rate should simply be the required rate of return
on the market portfolio, which is
R bar M. Therefore, the denominator becomes
1 plus R bar M.
Since the expected gross return on the market
is also 1 plus R bar M, we then have PV1 of CF2
is 1 plus RM1, which is simply the gross return
on the market in year one.
We didn't consider the present value of this cash flow
in year zero.
Since the value of this asset in year one, which is 1 plus RM1
has the same risk as the market, its present value today
is simply its expected value today
discounted at the expected rate of return on the market.
The expected value of PV1 today is the gross return
on the market.
We then have PV of 0 equals 1 plus E0 of RM1 divided by 1
plus the expected value of RM1.
Finished in the calculation, that gives us $1.
This result is not surprising.
If we have a dollar today and invest it in S&P 500
for two years, the resulting cash flow
is exactly CF2, again, ignoring dividends.
We can rewrite the present value of CF2
in the form of the last equation on the slide.
PV0 of CF2 equals the expectation
at 0 of CF2 divided by 1 plus the expected value of RM1
times 1 plus the expected value of RM2.

That equals-- again, expected value of CF2 divided by 1 plus
R bar M squared.
Finished in the calculation, that gives us $1.
In this equation, we are using the same discount rate
for both year one and year two.
Given that we assume a flat interest rate curve,
this also implies a constant risk premium
for different horizons and periods.
The reason this is the case is that, for the cash
flow under consideration, which is CF2 here,
its risks over the two periods are the same
and are compounding on each other.
Therefore, we can use the same risk-adjusted discount
rate for both periods assuming a constant risk-free rate
and a constant price of risk, which
is the premium on the market portfolio.
The above two examples show that in addition
to assuming constant time value of money
in price of risk for different future periods,
a constant discount rate is justifiable
if the risks of a cash flow is compounding
at a constant rate over time.
Some assets or cash flows may have their risks
evolving in this fashion over time,
such as the value of a stock.
But not all assets, are like this
such as risk-free government bonds.
In our NPV analysis, we have to be
mindful of the various approximations we are making,
their limitations, and possible remedies when needed.