
PROFESSOR: When evaluating a project,
we rely on two inputs, the project's expected cash
flow, and its discount rate.
The expected cash flow is based on information
we have today about the project's future prospects.
And the discount rate is based on the risk characteristics
of the cash flow.
What may be sometimes underestimated
is the fact that future cash flow forecasts should also
take into account possible actions the firm's managers may
take when they receive new information on the project's
prospects.
In real investments, managers often
have options to revise decisions or to take on new decisions
in response to new information.
Such a flexibility is also called "real options"
as they associate with real investment decisions.
This is to distinguish them from financial options, which
are associated with financial contracts.
Real options can be very valuable
and should be included in the valuation of a project.
For example, after launching a product,
the manager may be able to shut it down
if things turn out to be a lot worse than expected,
to avoid severe losses, or to expand production
if there is an unexpected increase
in the demand for the product.

The possibility to take on new decisions or initiatives
is sometimes also referred to as "strategic considerations,"
which should be included in the NPV analysis.
In considering real options associated with a project,
we deal with them in two steps.
First is identification.
Are there real options embedded in the project,
and what types of options are they?
And the second step is about valuation,
how to value these real options.
We will start with the identification of real options.
First, we know that real options are embedded
in almost all the projects we deal with except the most
trivial ones.
They are not hard to find.
For any business, you have almost infinite amount
of flexibility to modify different parts
of your operations.
But most of them are probably not
of the first order importance.
The key in considering real options
is to find the important ones.
It takes finance knowledge, practice, and sometimes vision
to do it well.
Two considerations are essential for real or strategic options.
The first is, new information possibly arrives in the future.
Second, the new information, when arrives,
may affect decisions.
The reason behind these two conditions are straightforward.
First, if there's no new information in the future,
we would have perfect foresight and need no flexibility.
Second, when we have new information,
it is of no value if we cannot act on it.
Therefore, identifying real options first
boils down to what kind of relevant information
may arrive in the future and how, if at all,
it may substantially change our decisions.