PROFESSOR: Let's consider a simple example of real options.
UW, Inc., a mining company, is considering buying a copper
mine with the following data.
The mine can produce 10 million kilograms of copper.
Copper extraction will take one year
at a cost of $5.4 per kilogram paid up front.
Copper price today is $6 per kilogram.
Copper price next year can either increase by 30%
or decrease by 20%, with equal probability.
The uncertainty about copper price
is fully resolved next year.
That is, copper price will stay constant afterwards.
We're going to further assume copper price
risk is purely idiosyncratic.
The risk-free rate in the market is 5%.
The question we would like to answer
is, what is the NPV of this mine?
This will be the highest price UW is willing to pay.
The NPV depends on what UW does with the mine
after acquiring it.
We consider two possible strategies.
The first is to extract the copper now.
And the second is to extract next year.
Extracting now, we have the following.
The expected cash flow next year per kilo of copper
is 1/2 times 6, which is the current copper price, times 1
plus 30%--
that will be the expected price of copper next year
if it goes up--
plus 6 times 1 minus 20%.
That will give us the price if the copper price goes down
next year.
Averaging the two gives us the expected copper price
next year.
And it is 1/2 times 7.8 plus 4.8.
And that gives us $6.3 per kilo.
Since the copper risk is idiosyncratic,
we can simply use the risk-free rate as the discount rate.
The NPV per kilogram of copper is then
NPV 0 equals minus 5.4--
that's the extraction cost--
plus 6.3-- that's the expected copper price next year--
discounted at 5%.
That gives us $0.60 per kilogram of copper.
What if the risk is not diversifiable?
Then we cannot simply use the risk-free rate to do
the discounting.
We would have to use state prices to discount
the future cash flows.
We will deal with this situation a bit later.
Now, let's consider the strategy of extracting next year.
That is year 1.
We have two states for year 1--
up and down-- representing the state in which the copper
price goes up or it goes down.
In the upper state, the project's NPV
in year 1 per kilogram, again, is NPV 1 in up state
equals minus 5.4--
again, that's the extraction cost--
plus 7.8-- that's the copper price in the up state--
discounted at 5%, because we are getting the copper
a year later.
Finishing the calculation, we have $2.03.
In the down state, the project's NPV in year 1
is given by the following equation.
That is NPV in the down state equals minus 5.4,
same as before, plus 4.8, the copper
price in the down state in one year, discounted
at the 5% risk-free rate.
That gives us minus $0.83 per kilogram.
These are the present values in year 1
in both the up and down state, respectively.
Discounting back to year 0, again using the risk-free rate,
we obtain the project's NPV today.
That's in year 0.
NPV 0 equals 1/2 times the NPV in year 1--
in the up state--
plus the NPV 1 in the down state, discounted
at the risk-free rate of 5%.
Plug in the numbers.
We get 1 over 1.05 times minus 5.4,
again, extraction cost, plus 1/2 of the expected copper price.
That's the average between 7.8 and 4.8.
We then discounted that back at the 5% risk-free rate.
Finishing the calculation, we are getting $0.57 per kilogram.
This, of course, is lower than the NPV if we extract now.
Therefore, waiting for a year to extract yields a lower NPV.
Using the naive discounted cash flow analysis,
we arrive at the following.
The mine has a positive NPV.
It is better to start the extraction now than wait.
The NPV of the mine is 10 million--
that's the total amount of copper--
times $0.60.
That's the NPV per kilo.
That gives us $6 million in total.
This actually will be the NPV of the mine.
And this will be the highest price
UW should be willing to pay.
The question is, is this the best we can do?
Let's think this over.
In the previous calculation, if we wait and the copper price
goes up, extraction gives an NPV in year 1 of $2.03 per kilo,
as computed before.
If, however, the copper price goes down,
extraction gives an NPV of minus $0.83 per kilo.
But wait a minute.
In this case, it does not make sense to extract.
If we have the option not to extract in the down state,
we should then simply abandon the mine,
resulting in NPV of 0, not a loss.
Taking this option into account, we
obtain the NPV of the mine in year 0
to be NPV 0 equals 1/2 times the NPV in year 1 for the up
state plus the NPV in year 1 for the down state
and then discounted at the risk-free rate.
Given that the NPV in year 1 for the down state
will be $0 if we abandon the mine,
the calculation will give us $0.97 per kilo for NPV of $0.
As a result, the NPV of the mine is then 10 million kilos
of copper in total times $0.97 per kilo,
which is the NPV at time 0 for each kilo of copper.
That gives us $9.7 million in total.
This is higher than the NPV of $6 million
if we extract right away.
Therefore, with the option to abandon the mine in year 1
if copper price goes down yields the following optimal strategy.
Don't extract now.
But wait until next year.
If the copper price goes up, we extract.
Otherwise, we don't.
The calculation above shows that the option
to wait and abandon in the bad state to avoid losses
can significantly change the mine's value today.
This example demonstrates that when
we can alter our decisions based on new information,
like learning about copper price in one year,
the corresponding optionality is important in the valuation
of a project.
In terms of how to value these options,
there are two approaches.
The first-- it's so-called the dynamic NPV, which takes into
account the optimal decisions along each node of the decision
tree.
The second approach is option pricing.
In the above example, the mine can be viewed as a call option
on copper, which can be exercised either in year 0
or in year 1.
This is an American call.
The strike price is simply the extraction cost.
Given the binomial price process for copper,
we can easily value this option.
We will discuss more of this approach later in this lecture.