
What we will do next is to provide a simple categorization
of different types of real options frequently encountered
in real investments.
In identifying important optionality in projects,
we need to carefully consider project characteristics
such as different phases, scenarios
and strategic investments.
In particular, we should examine the pattern of cash flows
and expenditures over time and in different states,
and what optionality we may have in modifying them.
For example, large expenditures are likely to be discretionary.
The types of real options can be roughly categorized as follows.
Growth option refers to the option
to grow a project or asset.
Abandonment option refers to the option
to abandon a project like the copper mine
example we just considered.
Option to expand and reduce scale.
A timing option, which refers to the option
to launch a project at different points in time.
An option to switch inputs, outputs, processes et cetera.
Such a taxonomy is not absolute and complete.
It is mostly for convenience and exposition.
There can be overlaps between the different types
and also more complex options.
Next, we will consider some examples of these options.
We start with growth options.
An investment or project contains a growth option
if it allows follow-up investments, which
can be determined later based on newly arrived information.
This optionality, not a commitment in follow-up
investments, is the key here.
The growth option clearly has positive value,
a basic property of options.
Therefore, it needs to be included
in valuing the project.
Projects with highly valuable growth options
are often viewed as having strategic value, value
from future investment opportunities
beyond the cash flow from current investments.
The idea of growth options here is very much the same
as the idea we introduced in stock valuation
in part 1 of this course.
There, we try to value these options using
a direct discounted cash flow approach.
Such an approach, although conceptually correct,
can be hard to implement.
This is because options have nonlinear risk characteristics.
Finding the right discount rate is not trivial.
But with the option valuation methodology
we have developed earlier, we can value
these options more handily.

We can easily list many examples of growth options, R&D
for example, which can lead to profitable applications
if successful, movies which can lead to sequels if popular,
investing in emerging markets, exploring oil drills and so on.
Growth options are akin to call options.
You have the option but not the obligation
to obtain an asset by paying a cost.
It is worth noting that growth options can be nested.
In the case of movies, one sequel
could give you the option for the following
sequel, like Rocky I could lead to Rocky II
could lead to Rocky III.
For certain industries, businesses and projects
growth options can be very valuable,
accounting for over half of the market
value of some industries, for example,
industries with heavy R&D like high tech or pharmaceuticals,
industries with multiple product generations like computers,
software and also pharmaceuticals,
or platforms like Amazon or Facebook.
A project contains an abandonment option
if it can be shut down by choice.
Abandonment options can be hidden in aggregate forecasts.
While it may be preferable to continue operations on average,
shutting down can be desirable under some scenarios.
The option to do so can avoid large losses
or disastrous situations which can be very valuable.
Obviously, abandonment options are just put options.
You have the option but the obligation
to get rid of something and receive a payment, which
is the liquidation value.
Scale options refer to the flexibility
in adjusting the scale of your operations
when conditions change.
For example, when conditions are more favorable than expected,
the firm can scale up production or speed up resource usage.
When conditions are less favorable than expected,
do the reverse or even temporarily halt operations.
In many ways, scale options are similar to growth
and abandonment options.
Examples include the ability to slow
the rate of mineral extraction from a mine,
for example, or the ability to add a temporary third shift
at a plant.
The timing of an investment is sometimes flexible.
This timing option can be very valuable
as we have seen in the copper mine example.
Another example is a building permit when you have the option
to choose when to build within the permit's lifetime.
The value of the permit should factor
in this timing flexibility, which can be very important.
The timing option is akin to an American call option.
Its owner has the right but not the obligation
to obtain an asset at any time within a given window
by paying a cost, which is the exercise price.
As said earlier, the timing option
is valuable only when future information can be useful.
Timing options are particularly important
for the following industries or projects--
all R&D intensive industries like pharmaceuticals,
long development and capital-intensive projects
like large-scale construction and power plants,
or start-up ventures.