
PROFESSOR: Having discussed various types
of real options embedded in different types of investments
or projects, we now turn our attention to the evaluation.
In general, the evaluation of real options
is a challenging task given the non-linear nature
of their risks.
However, when the underlying asset for a real option
is traded in the financial market,
we can then apply the option valuation techniques developed
earlier for financial options to value real options.
We demonstrate this method through examples.

The first example we're going to consider
assumes a StartUp Inc, which is a biotech startup company.
Its only asset is a patent on the new vaccine
with the following information.
First, if the vaccine goes into production now,
you will generate a sure profit of $1 million per year
for the next 17 years, which is how long the patent
protection lasts.
Afterwards, the profit drops to zero.
The production requires $10 million of initial investment.
The interest rates have a flat term structure.
It's at 8% per year now, which we assumed year zero.
The interest rates can go up to 10%
or down to 5% next year, which is year one.
And it will remain constant afterwards.
The question we want to answer is,
what's the value of the firm or its patent?
The NPV of starting production today
in year zero, that is, is NPV equals 1 million,
which is the annual profit, divide by 8%, the discount
rate, times 1 minus 1 over 1 plus 8% to the 17th power.
And that's the present value of future profits for the 17
years, minus the production cost of $10 million today.
Netted out, they'll give us minus $878,362.
And this is a negative number.
Given the current interest rates,
clearly it does not make sense to produce today.
But is the value of the company or the patent negative
or zero, then?
Of course not.
The company has an option to produce the vaccine
now or later.
But not the obligation.
Therefore, its value must be positive.
What happens next year when interest rates change?
4% to 5%, or rise to 10%?

Let's think this through.
If interest rates increase to 10% in year one,
the NPV from production is still negative
because the present value of future profits
will be even smaller.
Therefore, we will choose not to produce
yielding zero NPV in year one.
However, if interest rates decrease to 5% in year one,
then the NPV of investing in the vaccine becomes positive.
Its NPV would equal 1 million divided
by 5%, the interest rates then, then 10 times 1 minus 1 over 1
plus 5% to the 16th power minus 10,
which is the production cost.
And that gives us positive $837,770.
Therefore, when interest rates fall in year one,
it will make sense to produce, which creates a positive value.
This clearly shows that the value of the firm or the patent
should always be positive today.
Putting things together, we have the following strategy.
If interest rates rise, investing in production
yields a negative NPV.
Consequently, we will choose not to invest resulting in NPV of 0
in that state.
If interest rates fall, investing in production
yields a positive NPV of $837,770.
Of course, in this scenario, we will produce and capture
the positive NPV.
How do we obtain the NPV of the patent
with these two scenarios?
We will need to find the risk neutral probabilities or state
prices for the two possible states.
Interest rates going up to 10% or down to 5%.
In order to do this, we need to look
at the prices of traded securities
whose prices are also tied to the interest rates.
Let's consider a 17 year risk free annuity
that pays $1,000 per year.
From the present value formula for annuities,
the price of this annuity today at an interest rate of 8%
should be S equals 1,000 divided by 8% the interest
rate times 1 minus 1 over 1 plus 8% to the 17th power.
Finishing the calculation, that gives us $9,122.
That is the price of this annuity today
at an interest rate of 8%.
Next year, if the interest rates go up to 10%,
the value of this annuity becomes
Sd, that's the price in a down state,
equals 1,000, that's the payment then, plus the present value
of future payments of $16,000 in total.
If we finish this equation, we will get $8,824.
That is also equal to d, the gross return on this asset,
times S, its current price.
And this gives d of 0.967.
If the interest rates go down to 5%, the value of this annuity
becomes Su equals 1,000 plus 1,000 over 5% times 1 minus 1
over 1.05 raised to the 16th power.
Finishing the calculation, we get $11,838.
That's should equal to u, the gross return on the asset,
in upstate times S, its current price.
This gives u of 1.298.
With u and d, and the risk free rate, RF,
we can find the risk neutral probability q
for the state in which interest rates dropped to 5%.
Remember that the risk neutral probability
is the probability under which the expected return on annuity
is the same as the one year risk free rate, which is 8%.
We then have Q equals to 1 plus RF minus d divide by u minus d.
That's the standard formula for risk neutral probabilities.
Plug in the numbers.
That gives us 1.08 minus 0.967 divided by 1.298 minus 0.967.
Finishing that calculation, that gives us q of 0.341.
The value of the investment opportunity
today is then given by its expected payoff
under the risk neutral probabilities discounted
at the risk free rate.
This is the risk neutral pricing we
have learned in the lecture on option pricing.
PV zero, then, of this pattern should equal to its value
in the upstate, which is 833,770, times the risk
neutral probability for that state, which is 0.341 plus 0,
which is valued in the downstate times the risk
neutral probability.
Then, divide that by 1 plus the risk free rate,
this gives us $264,518.
In this example, we see that even though the project's cash
flow is risk free, its value can change with the interest
rates, which creates a substantial option
value for the firm's asset.
This option value, which is 221,693
comes from the firm's ability to use the patent when
interest rates fall and the value from production
becomes positive.
This option can be viewed as a growth option or a timing
option.