
PROFESSOR: Next, we consider another example
in which the real option is embedded in a project's
follow on projects.
The setting is in 1993, MC Inc., which
is a tech company in Cambridge, Massachusetts,
is considering whether to enter the PC business, which
is taking off at the time.
At that point, we have the following information.
The R&D department has developed a new PC model.
Let's call that model A. If launched now, which is 1990,
the cash flow for model A is given
in the table on the slide, which spans from 1990 to 1995.
The second row gives the net investments needed.
In particular, the initial investment is $450 million,
which is quite substantial.
Further investments of $50 million and $100 million
are needed in the following two years.
In the last two years, 1994 and 1995, they turn positive.
The after-tax operating profit is then given in the third row.
It is $140 million in 1991, $159 million in 1992, and so on.
The net cash flow is given in the last row
in the table minus $450 million in 1990, plus $90 million
in 1991, $59 million in 1992, et cetera.
Therefore, after the initial investment,
net cash will turn positive in the following years.
Suppose the cost of capital for the PC business is 20%.
The NPV of launching model A is given by its NPV, which
equal to minus $450, the initial investment, plus $90,
which is the profit in year 1 divided
by 1 plus 20%, the cost of capital,
plus $59, the profit in year 2 divided
by 1 plus the cost of capital, 20% to the power 2, and so on.
If we finish the calculation, we get minus $42 million.
Clearly, model A is a loser.
Its NPV is negative.
However, we also have the following information.
Launching model A in 1990 will put MC Inc.
into the PC business and allow it
to introduce model B in 1993.
The expected cash flow for model B
is similar to that of model A, but twice as large.
Since model A is a loser, so would
be model B. Its expected NPV would be twice as negative.
But there are future scenarios in which model
B yields large payoffs.
The table on this slide lists some
of these positive scenarios for model B,
captured by its NPV in 1993 at the time of its launch.
The second row gives the benchmark scenario
in which model B's NPV will be minus $84 million, twice
that of model A.
However, after the launch of model A,
MC Inc. may get better with the PC business.
The initial investment for model B
can be substantially lower than currently expected,
say 30% lower.
This will then leave the NPV of model B
to be positive $178 million in 1993.
Or the sales of model B can be 40% higher
than the current forecast, due to the unexpected success
of model A and of model B itself.
Or, profit margin becomes 50% higher than expected,
as MC Inc. gets more efficient with the PC
production over model A phase.
These are all good scenarios, reasonable
and beyond our current expectations.
Of course, they are many bad scenarios, too, also reasonable
and beyond expectations.
Averaging over all these scenarios,
we will have the benchmark scenario, which
is the current expectation.
And it's negative.
The ultimate question is still if MC Inc.
should launch model A. In expected terms,
model B loses $84 million, doubling the loss of model A.
How can this change the decision on model A today?
The plot on the slide shows the probability distribution
of model B's NPV in 1993 across different scenarios then.
The x-axis is model B's NPV in 1993 in billion dollars.
It is uncertain today, in 1990, and can take different values
in 1993.
The y-axis gives the corresponding probability
density for these values.
To the right of 0 are the good scenarios in which model
B will have positive NPVs in 1993.
To the left of 0 are the bad scenarios.
From the plot, we make two observations.
First, the bad scenarios are more likely,
since they have higher probability weights.
Average over all scenarios, we will obtain the expected value
of minus $84 million, which is slightly to the left of 0.
Second, the distribution is very wide.
With fairly high probability, the NPV
can be higher than, say, $250 million, or $0.25 billion.
Similarly, it can be lower than, say, minus $250 million.
This means that there is a lot of uncertainty or volatility
in model B's NPV, or value, going forward.
This last observation is important.
First, we know that the decision to stop model B is in 1993,
not now.
This is different for model A. Therefore,
model B should be viewed as an option, not a commitment.
In particular, as long as MC Inc.
can abandon model B in 1993, only the right-hand side
of the distribution matters.
In other words, we only need to care
about the good scenarios of model B, or its upside.
The bad scenarios don't matter, since we can avoid them,
if they turn out to be the case, by simply not doing model B.
Therefore, model B being an option only
has positive value, at least, not negative.
Moreover, since the right-hand side of the NPV distribution
is huge, it's option value can be substantial,
even though the chance of ending up there is less than 50%.
Let's now consider how to value model B as a real option.
For this purpose, we need to add a few more assumptions.
These assumptions will stay on the conservative side
to avoid producing inflated outcomes.
First, we'll assume that the decision on model B
has to be made in 1993.
MC Inc. cannot keep waiting.
As we know, extending the lifetime of an option
increases its value.
Two, in order to launch model B in 1993,
MC Inc. has to launch model A in 1990.
In other words, launching model A later is very expensive.
Waiting on model A also adds value.
And we want to limit that.
Three, MC Inc. has the option to stop model B in 1993.
Thus, possible losses for model B is limited.
As we have learned, this is a very critical assumption.
As stated before, the initial investment in 1993,
year model B, is $900 million, twice that of model A's, which
is $450 million.
And it's assumed to be fixed.
The net cash flow, or profit of model B after its initial year,
which is 1993, is twice that of Model A's.
It is $180 million in 1994, $118 million in 1995, and so on.
We can view model B's profits as an underlying asset.
At 20% cost of capital, the NPV of this asset,
that is, model B's net profits, discounted back to 1990
is 1 over 1 plus 20% to the power 3.
This is to discount its present value
from 1993 to 1990 times the present value
of its future profits in 1993.
That is, 180 divided by 1 plus 0.2 plus 118
divided by 1 plus 0.2 square, and so on.
If we finish this calculation, we get PV0 to be $472 million.
Therefore, model B is really a call option
on an asset whose current value is $472 million
with a strike price of $900 million,
which is the initial investment, and a maturity of three years.
To value this option, we need the volatility of this asset.
That is, the volatility of its value over time.
Since this asset is not directly traded in the financial market,
we look for similar assets traded in the market
and use their price volatility as an approximation.
Dell, for example, is a pure play company in the PC business
then whose shares are traded.
Dell's share price has an annual volatility of 35%.
We will use this to approximate the volatility
of the present value of model B's net profits.
The risk free interest rate was 9% in 1990.
With the assumptions above, we can value the opportunity
to launch model B in 1993 as a three year European call
option with the following specifications.
The strike price is $900 million,
the initial investment.
The underlying asset is the profit stream for model B.
The present value of the underlying asset now,
which is 1990, is $472 million.
The volatility of the underlying asset is 35% per year.
And the risk free rate is 9%.
From the Black-Scholes formula, the value of this call
is $54 million.
We will return to this calculation in a second.

Factoring in the option value of model B,
we now can assess the total value of model A.
The table on the slide summarizes the results.
The second row gives the NPV from a naive discounted cash
role calculation.
Model A itself gives minus $42 million.
And A plus B is minus 42 minus $84 million,
discounted back three years at 20%.
This gives us a total of minus $91 million.
This is clearly a no go.
However, when we realize that model B is an option,
the picture is different.
This is given by the second column in the table.
The NPV on model A is still minus 42 million,
while the model B really gives an option
value, which has a positive amount of $54 million.
The sum, then, is $12 million positive,
given in the last row of the second column.
Therefore, we conclude the following.
Model A, by itself, is a loser.
But it also gives MC Inc. the option, but not
the obligation to launch model B, which has a positive value.
Given the high uncertainty about the future value of model B
as shown above, this option is quite valuable.
Adding the two values together, we actually
obtained a positive value for launching
model A. One thing we want to add
is that the scale of this project,
namely launching model A, and thus getting into the PC
business, is fairly large, hundreds
of millions of dollars.
Model A alone requires initial investment of $450 million.
The resulting NPV, even including
the option value of model B, is quite small, only $12 million.
If we vary the assumptions a bit,
such as cash flow forecasts and volatility estimates,
the result can easily become negative.
MC Inc. finally decided not to launch model A.
Before we finish this example, let's
take a look at the details of the option
valuation for model B using the Black-Scholes formula.
All value numbers are in million dollars.
The value of the underlying asset A,
which is the future profit of model B, is now worth $472.
The strike price K is $900 for the call
option on the underlying asset.
The call is European.
And it's maturity T is three years.
The volatility of the underlying asset, sigma, is 35% per year.
The interest rate, RF, is 9% per year.
The value of x, a key input to the Black-Scholes formula,
is given by the first equation on this slide, which
depends on the current asset value A, strike price
K, interest rate RF, volatility sigma, and maturity T.
Put in the corresponding numbers,
we have x equals minus 0.3351.
It's close to 0, but slightly negative.
Putting the value of x into the Black-Scholes formula,
we have the second equation on the slide, which
gives the value of the call option C. It is $54 million,
as stated before.