PROFESSOR: In this question, I will teach you
how to construct arbitrage trading strategies
in foreign exchange markets.
Suppose that, currently, the currency pay rate United States
dollar to Japanese yen--
USD, JPY-- trades at 105.
This means that for one United States dollar,
you get 105 Japanese yen.
Now also, suppose that USD-JPY currency pair,
one-year forward on that currency pair
currently trades at 106.
Now we will also assume that the current US one-year risk-free
interest rate is 1%, and the current Japanese one-year
risk-free interest rate is 3%.
So the goal is to construct an arbitrage trading
strategy that pays $100 right now and nothing in the future.
Let me mention that all of these interest rates
and the current pricing of this currency pair's exchange rates
are hypothetical and may not reflect the current reality.
Let's start solving this question
by assuming that we borrow x United States dollars today.
We will keep $100 to ourselves and consume it
because this is what we want.
We want to construct a strategy that gives us $100 right now.
So out of this x borrowed amount,
we keep $100 to ourselves.
And then the rest, x minus 100, what
we will do with this is we will exchange it
right now to Japanese yen at the current spot exchange rate,
and then we will invest this amount of Japanese yen
into the one-year risk-free Japanese bond that pays us
3% interest rate.
Now the question is, how much will we get in one year?
Well, let's see.
This is how much USD we have today, x minus 100.
We're exchanging this into Japanese yen,
and the current exchange rate is 105,
so this is how much Japanese yen we have after we exchanged
this USD amount.
And then we're earning 3% interest rate on this amount
in Japanese yen, and the interest rate is 3%,
so this is multiplied by 1 plus 3%.
So this is how much in Japanese yen
we will get in one year from this investment strategy.
Now, what are our liabilities?
Well, we borrowed x United States dollars,
and we borrowed it at the risk-free rate of 1%.
So therefore, in year one, we owe
the bank or whoever we borrowed this from x times 1 plus 1%.
And so our liabilities are in the United States dollars.
Now, because our income is in Japanese yen,
we can convert these liabilities in the Japanese yen
as well so that that way we can match our income
and our liabilities in the same currency.
So now if this is our liabilities in the United
States in year one, what would be
these liabilities in Japanese yen one year from now?
Well, we can know this for sure if we
lock into the current one-year forward exchange rate that
currently trades at 106.
So if we do that, then our liabilities one year
from now in Japanese yen would be x times 1 plus 1% times 106.
Now since we expressed both our income and our liabilities
in Japanese yen, all we have to do
is to make sure that our liabilities-- or we have
enough income to satisfy our liabilities in one year.
So all we have to do is we have to equate
our income to our liabilities, and this is the equation
that we have.
This is a very simple equation with just one unknown.
We're solving it for x.
And x here would equal to $9,922 United States dollars.
So therefore, to construct, given this information,
to construct an arbitrage trading strategy that
pays $100 today, we need to borrow $9,922 United States
dollars and do the following steps.
So we can keep $100 to ourselves if we convert the remaining
amount, which is $9,922, into Japanese yen,
invest our income--
and if we lock into this forward rate as well--
our income in one year is exactly
enough to pay our liabilities that we
owe our bank from whom we borrowed this x dollar amount.
Now, what makes this arbitrage possible
in this particular example is the fact that this forward
is mispriced.
In other words, you get too high of an income in Japanese yen
relative to the United States dollars
so that at the current forward exchange rate,
you're getting a good deal, and you're
able to do this so-called carry trade,
borrow in the low yielding currency,
convert this amount of low yielding currency
into high yielding currency, invest there, and earn profit
by doing that.
Now, in fact, this is how we price forwards,
by assuming that such profitable trading strategy is not
possible.
So therefore, the foreign exchange rate
here has to be such that when you're
trying to construct this particular trading strategy,
you get exactly 0 at the end.
So the fact that this is possible here
is just indicative of the fact that this forward
is currently mispriced.
Now, let me make one remark.
Recall that when we started this construction of this arbitrage
trading strategy, we started by assuming
that we borrow x in USD.
What if, by solving this, we would
have gotten a negative number at the very end?
In this case, what it would have implied
is that we borrowed in the wrong currency, in other words,
in more expensive currency.
In that case, if we get the negative number here
at the end, what we need to do is
that we need just to reverse the chain of arguments
and actually borrow a certain amount in Japanese yen
and repeat the process by converting it into USD
and investing in the United States risk-free securities.