PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
show how to construct arbitrage trading strategies using
forward contracts.
Consider the following example.
Suppose of the current price of a dividend paying stocks
equals $1,000.
Suppose the risk free rate equals 3%
and the dividend yield is 2%, both
are continuously compounded.
You notice that a forward price for delivery
of this stock in two years is $1,025.
Is there an arbitrage opportunity here?
Let's use the model of payout to compute the forward price
given the current stock price, which is given
by the following expression.
Applied to our case, the forward price for delivery of stock
two years from now should equal $1,020.20.
Given that the forward price that is quoted to us is $1,025,
this forward is overpriced.
How should we exploit this overpricing?
Consider the following trading strategy.
First, we engage in one short forward contract.
Second, we borrow the following amount of dollars,
e to the power negative y times cap T, times S0 which
is the current share price.
And we borrow this amount at the risk-free rate.
Third, we buy e to the power of negative y times
T shares of stock.
And fourth, during the next two years
that we are holding this stock, we
will reinvest continuous stream of dividends
by buying additional units of the stock.
Notice that the initial cost of setting up this portfolio
is zero.
Now let's see what happens two years from now.
First, let's figure out how many shares of stock
we will have at the end of year 2.
Well, because we're continuously reinvesting dividends,
our future value of the number of shares that we have,
which I denote here as the number of shares at cap T,
would equal to the exponent raised to the power yT, which
gives us the future value of the initial amount of the number
of shares that we purchased from the very beginning, which
is e raised to the power negative y cap T.
This gives us 1.
So therefore, at the end of year 2,
we will have 1 share of stock.
Second, what we will do is that we
will deliver this one share to the counterparty to whom we
sold our forward contract, and collect $1,025.
Third, we will need to repay the loan.
The future value of this loan is given
by the following expression.
Because we borrowed at the risk-free rate,
and the initial borrowed amount was
e to the power negative yT times S0,
this value grew to e to the power r times T times
the initial amount, which altogether gives us
S0 times e raised to the power r minus y multiplied by cap T.
And this gives us $1,020.20.
Altogether, this trading strategy generates a profit
of $4.80 per one forward contract that we short.
These arbitrage profits are possible because this forward
was overpriced relative to the model of payout
that we covered in class.