
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will review forward
interest rates, and we will consider
an example of arbitrage in the interest rate market.
The following table shows current interest rates.
The one-year spot rate is 1%, the two-year spot rate is 3%,
and the one-year forward rate in year 1 is 4%.
Construct the following three arbitrage strategies.
Strategy 1 pays $100 today and nothing in the future.
Strategy 2 pays $100 in year 1 and nothing otherwise.
And strategy 3 pays $100 in year 2 and nothing otherwise.
We will show you a generic approach
on how to tackle this type of questions, similar to the bond
arbitrage that we taught you in the first part of this course.
Suppose that you invest x dollars at one-year spot
rate, which we'll denote as r1.
Suppose that you invest y dollars at a two-year spot
rate, which we'll denote by r2.
And suppose that you will invest z dollars
at the one-year forward rate in year 1, which
we'll denote as f1.
Let's start by constructing the first arbitrage
strategy that generates $100 in year 0
and nothing in years 1 and 2.
We have the following system of three equations, each of which
shows our cash flows in years 0, 1, and 2.
Recall that we're investing x dollars at one-year spot rate
and y dollars at two-year spot rate.
So therefore, in year 0, our cash flows
are negative x and negative y, and that should equal to $100
that we would like to generate as part of our arbitrage
trading strategy.
The second equation shows our cash flows in year 1.
We get 1 plus r1 times x from our investment in year 0 at r1,
and at the same time we're spending z dollars
by investing at a one-year forward rate f1.
And that equals to 0 dollars because this is, again,
what we're trying to construct.
The third equation shows our cash flows in year 2.
We're getting 1 plus r2 squared times y.
This is the payoff from our initial investment of y dollars
at r2 for two years.
And we're getting 1 plus f1 times z.
This is the cash inflow from our investment of z
at f1 in year 1.
The total cash flow in year 2 equals
to 0 dollars as well, because this is
what we're trying to achieve.
Now let's solve this system of equations using Excel.
In this spreadsheet, we have coefficients
on x, y, and z in our system here in the matrix.
This coefficient is 1 times 1 plus r1.
This coefficient is 1 plus r2 raised to the power of 2.
And this is 1 plus f1.
So what we have to do right now is
that we have to invert this matrix,
and then we have to multiply it by this.
So what I will do here is that again, I
will highlight the cells.
I will say m inverse.
I will take this array, and I will hit Shift-Control-Enter,
because I'm on the Windows system,
to get the inverted matrix right here.
And then all I have to do is that I
will have to multiply this inverted matrix right here
by this desired outcome vector of the cash flows
that we were trying to achieve.
And this gives me positions on our bonds that we have to take.
In this vector that we just computed,
negative numbers imply short positions and positive numbers
imply long positions.
So that effectively means is that we are investing at r2
and we're borrowing at r1, and we're borrowing in the year 1
at f1 as well.
So you could see that in year 0, this strategy indeed produces
$100, because we're borrowing $10,103.81 at r1
and we're investing only $10,003.81 at r2,
therefore leaving ourselves $100.
Now let's see what our cash inflows and cash outflows
in years 1 and 2.
In year 1, our cash inflow would come from the fact
that we are borrowing this amount at f1 forward rate.
What would be our cash outflow?
Recall that we borrowed this amount in year 0 at r1,
and so therefore we have to repay this amount multiplied
by 1 plus interest rate r1.
And you could see that this is exactly
the same amount as our cash inflow,
and so therefore net, which is the sum of inflow and outflow
in this table that I constructed,
would equal to exactly 0.
In year 2, our cash flows would come from our investment at r2
in year 0, the amount of which would
be this multiplied by 1 plus r2 raised to the power of 2.
And our outflow will come from the fact
that we borrowed this amount at f1,
so therefore our cash outflow would
be this position multiplied by 1 plus the forward rate.
And again, you could see that the two
amounts are exactly the same.
So therefore, on net, we're getting 0 dollars in year 2.
So therefore, we achieved exactly the outcome
that we wanted.
We get $100 in year 0 and we get nothing in years 1 and 2.
Let me conclude by explaining economic intuition-- why,
in this arbitrage trading strategy,
we are going long the r2 rate and short r1 and f1.
Let's consider two scenarios.
In scenario 1, we're investing $100 for three years
at r2, and in scenario 2, investing $100
first for one year at r1, and then for another year at f1.
So let's see what would be the payoff of scenario 1
and scenario 2 at the end of year 2.
So scenario 1 gives us $100 times
1 plus r2, raised to the power of 2.
And scenario 2 gives us $100 multiplied by 1 plus r1
multiplied by 1 plus f1.
And that gives us $105.04.
So clearly, we can see that scenario 1 gives us
a higher payoff at the end of year 2 than scenario 2,
so therefore, relative to r1 and f1,
r2 is a good interest rate to invest at.
And therefore, our arbitrage trading strategy
that yields $100 today and nothing in years 1 and 2
goes long r2 and short r1 and f1.
