
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
use an example to demonstrate valuation of interest rate
swaps.
ABC Corporation has borrowed $3 million
for the next three years at a variable interest rate.
Under the terms of the loan, ABC will pay interest
at the end of years one, two, and three.
The interest rate that ABC will need
to pay at the end of year one is based on the one-year spot
interest rate in year zero.
The interest rate to be paid at the end of year two
will be based on the one-year spot rate in year one.
And the interest rate to be paid at the end of year three
will be based on the one-year spot rate in year two.
Typically, corporate bank loans are tied to benchmark interest
rates such as LIBOR.
These benchmark rates vary over time.
And therefore, interest rate and interest expense
that corporations pay on their bank loans vary over time.
Suppose that the current one year, two year,
and three-year spot rates are 3.5%, 4%, and 4.2%
respectively.
These spot rates will be used to calculate present values.
Now, given this term structure of interest rates,
we know that the interest rate for the first year of the loan
is 3.5%.
However, we do not know what the interest rate will
be during the second year of the loan
because it will be whatever the one-year spot interest
rate is at the beginning of the second year.
Based on spot interest rates today, we
can calculate the implied one-year spot
rate that will be in effect during the second year.
In other words, we can compute the one-year forward rate
in year one.
Please check that this rate is 4.502%.
However, under this loan, the interest rate
for the second year could be higher or lower than 4.502%
depending on the interest rates in year one.
Same logic applies to year three.
ABC Corporation is not comfortable
with the uncertainty of year two and year three interest rates.
So it wants to enter into an interest rate swap that
will fix the interest rates for the three
years of the term of this loan.
Let's characterize this interest rate swap.
It has a three-year term.
It has annual settlements with settlement dates
at the end of years one, two, and three.
And ABC Corporation will pay fixed rate
which I'll denote as rs during the three years of the loan.
The counterparty on the swap will pay the floating rate.
To price this swap, we need to find the fixed rate rs.
This interest rate should be fair to both parties
in the sense that the present value of interest expense
at variable rate should equal to the present value of interest
expense at the fixed rate.
We will use this equation to find rate rs.
To use this pricing equation, let's first
find our interest expense at the variable rates.
In year one, our interest expense
will be the principal amount, the $3 million,
multiplied by spot rate r1, which is
3.5% which gives us $105,000.
In year two, our interest expense
will be the face value of the loan, which is again $3 million
multiplied by one-year forward rate
in year one, which is 4.502%.
This gives us the interest expense of $135,072.46.
Finally, in year three, the interest expense
will be face value, $3 million, multiplied
by one-year forward rate in year two.
You can verify that this rate is 4.601%.
And therefore, the total interest expense in year three
is $138,034.64.
At the fixed interest rate rs, our annual interest expense
will be $3 million face value multiplied by the rate rs.
Putting this all together, this is our swap pricing equation.
The only unknown in this equation is the fixed rate rs.
Solving this equation for this rate
gives us the fixed rate of 4.185%.
