PROFESSOR: Let's take a look at the random walk model, which
is going to be our first and most basic example
of a stochastic process, and it's
building block for many more complex models
and finance, as many applications in other fields
as well.
So the first notion that we want to examine
is that of a stochastic process.
So a stochastic process is a time dependent random variable.
So we saw random variables x, y, z before,
and they occurred individually, we could add them up.
But now imagine, that we have one that's labeled by times.
So for each time we get a different value.
Now there are two important different cases.
One of them is where time evolves continuously,
and our variable S of t can be thought
of as a function of a continuous real variable t.
The other case, is where t evolves discretely.
And we have a sequence of points S 1, S 2, S 3 and so on,
that are separated in time.
When these are taken at uniform intervals,
we use these as the basis for a time series model.
After all, when we talk about time series data,
we think about a sequence of observations, usually labeled
by an integer, and sequential in time.
And typically, considered a uniform intervals, or at least
we like to think of them as uniform intervals.
So the continuous time is more complex
and uses different mathematical tools.
So we're going to deal with that later.
Within the discrete case, what are some
of the attributes and properties that we'd like to be aware of?
Well, we're going to label these with integer indices,
and there are cases where something might
be a finite or infinite length.
But we'll typically pick an origin, we'll call time 0,
and then we'll go forward from there.
We think about these being equally spaced,
but all that's required is that, the applications
view them as equally spaced.
An example from finance, in the equity markets,
is its conventional to look only at market day.
So we exclude weekends and holidays, and number
of the days sequentially.
That doesn't apply, for example, for earning of interest
that happens on a calendar day basis.
But we might still label points 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
10 to cover a two week period, even though the period is
14 days and the gap is longer over the weekends.
The choice of origin is going to depend on our convention and/or
applications.
We'll see interestingly, you might
want to keep an eye on this, usually it's not a big deal
and it's usually obvious where to begin.
But some of the mathematical properties strictly speaking,
such as stationarity, require series to be infinitely long.
And, of course, that's not true in financial applications.
Markets haven't been around infinitely long,
and we usually don't want to go back
to the beginning of time in any event.
Moreover, when we look at how to simulate
some of these processes, put them on a computer,
we're not going to be able to deal too easily
with infinite processes either.
So although the choice of an origin
is different from whether the integers run
from minus infinity to infinity or from 0 to infinity,
there are distinctions in the mathematics,
for a financial applications they shouldn't matter.
But it's something that we ought to check, as we go.
Now discrete time processes.
So we're to be talking about our often constructed
by taking an existing value and adding a new increment.
And this gives us a recursive definition, a building block,
a building method for a series.
So we start with a particular value,
we add a new increment x, that gives us our next value,
we add 1 and so on.
So we can also--
we can either think of a recursive definition.
Or we can just think of the value at a given point,
as the sum of all the increments that have come to that point.
Now of course, if we have the sequence S 1, S 2, S 3, S 4,
we can recover the increments by differencing successive ones.
And we'll see that that's very natural,
when we look at asset prices.
That the difference between price observations
or their logarithms, will be related to the returns
over a given period.

Time series are used for modeling processes that evolve
or that are observed discreetly in time.
So what we care about is that there
are discrete observations, discrete moments where
we might observe, measure, or draw
a value of a random variable.
It could be, that there's something
that's happening continuously, and we just
observe it periodically.
Or it could be a process that's genuinely discrete.
Also the values themselves can be
either continuous or discrete.
But the characteristic of a time series,
is that there are discrete values.
Now because of that, we often do describe them
in recursively, where we think about what the previous value
is and there's some innovation.
And this gives us--
when we think about this constructively,
notion about how things do evolve
in time and about how information arrives.
So we're always building on the past,
we're never drawing information from the future.
What does it mean to solve such a model?
Well, what we'll see is that, will
be interested in the entire sequence of random variables.
and it's often more natural to think of the entire trajectory,
the entire path.
But at a minimum, what we want to ask
are some description, some attributes,
some properties of the distribution of not yet
observed values, and possibly to construct
probabilistic forecasts for what they might be.
Some examples of things that could
be modeled via time series that evolve in time that
have this cumulative nature, we might
be looking inside a corporation and its cumulative revenues,
or its income or its profit.
And we might take its values, such as I 1, plus I 2 plus I 3,
say quater 1, quater 2, quater 3.
And adding up to the cumulative revenue for a firm,
we might be interested in the evolution of stock prices
and more of a lot more to say about this later on.
If we think of little r as representing
the logarithmic return of a stock price,
then we can see that actually, we
could write the value of the stock
price at time t as an initial value
plus the cumulative effect of returns
during period 1, period 2, period 3, period 4.
We'll be coming back to this very quickly.
And the simplest model of all, is the random walk model.
