PROFESSOR: The random walk model, like many models,
can and should be tested when it's applied against real world
data.
So let's do that.
The random walk model has a long history in finance.
It actually began back over a century in 1900
with Bachelier, whose mathematics thesis
studied the movements of stock prices on the Paris Bourse.
It was not much appreciated by his dissertation committee.
And the work was forgotten for a long time.
And we'll talk in more modern terms.
By the 1960s, random walks had reappeared in finance,
had been rediscovered, including Bachelier's work.
And the idea was that not only might random
walks provide a good model for the way stock prices seem
to behave in the market.
It would explain why there's so much randomness and noise
and why not everybody can get rich trading stocks.
But at a deeper level, it might be
a key to understanding how markets should behave
and how markets serve not only as
places where value is exchanged but where
information is exchanged.
And the idea is very simple.
The idea is that if people had access to information
in the markets, then if everyone knew
what something should be worth, then
the price should be at that value.
If you knew that something was going to be worth twice as
much tomorrow, why would you sell it today for anything
less?
So in a-- if we take that one step further,
we have this notion that if markets
were efficient in the sense that investors are taking
into account the available information,
then the only reason prices should change
is the arrival of new information
that hadn't been anticipated.
That's sort of the definition of news.
And in such a world, prices would behave randomly.
So somewhat paradoxically, randomness of prices
would be a sign of markets operating efficiently.
That is, a good market, a well functioning market,
is one where things look chaotic.
So this was promoted by a number of celebrated economists,
including these papers that I am showing you here.
One by Eugene Fama, who said specifically
that we can model stock prices as random walks.
And Paul Samuelson, who looked at exactly how and why it
was that this paradox might work mathematically.
And he has one of the most wonderful titles
in the paper, the Proof that Properly Anticipated Prices
Fluctuate Randomly, which captures this paradox.
But we're not interested just in the theoretical side.
We want to see the empirical side.
So what I'd like to do is show you how this can be tested.
And we'll follow another set of economists
who did celebrated work a couple of decades after this.
And you have the advantage of coming to this a couple decades
after them.
And you can check data now and see if they were right.
And who you agree with.
So what I'd like to do is review these results,
show you the computational approach,
give you some of the computational tools,
and then let you loose on the data.
OK?
So this is a great starting point
for doing empirical analysis and for seeing
how we might test different ideas
over different periods of time.
So the basic questions, though, that
motivate this are this question as to how stock prices--
I'll talk about stocks for concreteness.
But this could apply to any asset that
is investable and its tradable.
We do want to think about this primarily as being something
that we're going to apply to either exchange traded
instruments or things in a very active public market.
So that the data is observable.
It is essential that people be able to observe the data
and what goes on.
And possibly for different versions
of the efficient markets hypothesis
have access to other amounts of information.
But our examples will be with stocks
and the generalizations that are most easily
accessible with these computational tools
are those that come from published
prices on exchange traded assets of different kinds.
So we want to ask two things.
One of them is that we have the question about how
stock prices do behave.
That's an empirical question.
And then behind that is how stock prices should behave.
And as a background idea, let's think
of this idea of Fama and Samuelson and back to Bachelier
that possibly our null hypothesis should
be that stocks behave randomly.
Which sounds kind of crazy and radical when you first hear
it, but let's assume that that's the case,
let's follow this logic.
That it's the sign of a well functioning market.
And let's see how the behavior actually works.
So many people, depending on your background,
you might come to this with different ideas.
You might think that asset prices should be deterministic.
That's certainly true if you buy a bond
or you put money in a savings account.
You know how much money you should get out
if the bond is risk free and guaranteed.
And we've seen that in other financial instruments
and financial settings.
But when it comes to things like stocks,
there's a lot of uncertainty.
So it could be that there are general trends
that we could now and discern but there's some noise.
So maybe it's deterministic but for a little bit of noise.
Or maybe things are fundamentally random
and there's nothing deterministic at all.
So behind this, these are the questions again motivating it.
Are markets efficient?
And for many financial applications, really what this
comes down to is if they're not efficient in the economist
sense, we can ask a very practical question
that every investor has in mind.
Are asset prices predictable?
So the random walk model would say
that they're not except in a certain kind of trivial way.
And deviations from the random walk,
if we were to reject a random walk model, that
opens the door to the question to some of these questions like
are asset prices predictable?
What might be alternative models that we have?
So let's take a look at the data.
