PROFESSOR: The random walk model that we've seen thus far
is a two-parameter model, as this
is our generalized random walk.
We have two parameters, mu and sigma, which are constant.
And that tells us how the returns get generated
in subsequent periods.
So one of the things about this model
is if we're to look at data and try to match returns
to this model, obviously, that means
that if mu and sigma really are the constants
and this really is the model, then it means that if we
observe, measure, and estimate the parameters, mu and sigma,
they should be the same in any time period we look at,
to within sampling error and statistical estimates.
So one way you could think of testing the model
is we could say, well, this is the model.
Let's do mu and sigma.
Can we estimate them?
Do we get constants?
Then we're done.
Well, that's a little bit too specific.
And it doesn't generalize quite as nicely.
So what we're going to do is we want
to look at quantifying how big the variations are, so we can
get an idea as to how significant departures might be
if there are any, and to give us some insight as to what
other directions might be available
and what might be driving the results.
So what we're going to do is we're
going to look at some properties of the random walk--
in particular, the way that the variance scales,
with time, which we've already seen for the pure random walk
model.
And we're going to apply that to data
by looking at aggregating data over different observation
frequencies.
And let's do that concretely with particular stock.
And the stock that I like to use for this example
is Tootsie Roll.
The Tootsie Roll company makes wonderful candies
that will stick to your teeth, and make your dentist very
happy, probably over time.
And you'll enjoy eating them.
But a couple of reasons why I picked Tootsie Roll-- but you
can and should pick your own company to do the same thing.
First of all, the company is founded in 1896,
and has one of the longest track records
for any publicly-traded company.
So most companies, even the most venerable ones eventually
end up either going out of business,
acquiring or being acquired by somebody else.
And it's unusual to find extremely long time series.
There are only handful of companies
that go back to the beginning of the 20th century.
And data providers usually don't go back before 1926.
But Tootsie Roll is one of them, so that's one good reason.
It also recently found popularity
with the wallstreetbets crowd on Reddit.
So if you want to look at some real challenges
to the random walk model, you should take a look
at the data from 2020.
So we're going to cut off a bit before that.
Because certainly, the madness of crowds
is a subject for a whole other course
that we can take a look at.
But if you want to test the null hypothesis,
I'll leave that data out of sample.
And you can try it out on more recent data.
And finally, one of the reasons I like Tootsie Roll is they
ran a famous add back in my childhood ages
ago, with an owl and animals in the forest.
But the owl was the wise one who was
able to answer the question-- how many licks
does it take to get to the center of a Tootsie Pop.
And you should go look at that video on YouTube
or on Tootsie Roll's corporate website if you can find it.
It's a great example of empirical science at work.
So the approach we're going to take, as I mentioned before,
is falling to other economists--
Andrew Lo and Craig MacKinlay, who tested the random
walk model on a variety of data in the late 1980s.
And their approach was to look at some general properties
that we would expect to find if the random walk model held,
scaling behavior and by looking at the variance.
And they were able to analyze data
and came up with some really interesting results.
So I want to show you what they did.
Give you some code to show you how you can do it yourself--
and we'll take a look at the results for one example,
for the case of Tootsie Roll stock.
Lo and MacKinlay applied this for individual stocks.
They looked across stock indices.
They looked at equal weighted, market cap weighted indices.
And I strongly recommend taking a look at their original paper,
after or before or alongside going through this.
So what were the elements?
They were looking at what's called a variance ratio
test, that we'll define in a moment, which
lets us get at the behavior of a random walk
in the following way-- we have a problem
if we were to apply the data.
The version that we saw, where we
saw that the variance of a random walk
grew linearly with time, is great.
If you look at longer and longer time periods.
But if we think about doing that with financial data,
we immediately see that there's a problem, which
is something might have changed in the market.
It's not the same data if this were
generated from a random number generator and a Monte Carlo.
Sure that would work.
But we have a lot of different potential things
that might come into play if we look at 1896 to 2000.
And then the next 20 years and the next 50 years and so on,
a lot of economic things change.
And perhaps we don't need to assume
that over the entire period that everything was random.
There might be over some period.
So the idea that Lo and MacKinlay applied
was to look at the variance over random walks
of different lengths taken not by extending the time period,
but by increasing the observation frequency.
That is they subdivided into smaller and smaller chunks
so they could look at one month returns, one week returns, one
day returns, and so on.
In the case of Lo and MacKinlay, they did weeks.
Conversely, we could aggregate up.
So we could think of a base observation frequency.
I'll use daily frequencies.
Lo and MacKinlay used weekly.
And we could say what happens if I compute
using one day, if I compute using two days, four days,
15-day periods, and so on.
And in each case, if the observation period
gets longer and is more coarse grained,
that there will be fewer returns in the sum.
So that will give us some behavior,
and let's just do the arithmetic and we'll see.
And then we'll compare it with the data.
So what we'll do is we'll construct a test that nicely
eliminates a lot of things that we don't really
want to worry about from real world market and the data.
And then we'll compare and see what the consequences are.
So let's first look at some of the data.
So I've gotten this data from Yahoo Finance.
in R using the tidyquant package and the tq_get() function.
You can pull this data in, or you
can download it and do the same thing in Excel if you want.
But let's take a look.
Here's an example of recent period
of prices for Tootsie Roll stock, ending through 2017.
As I mentioned, we're leaving out the Reddit period.
If I compute the log returns from the successive price
differences on a daily level and I plot their time series,
I get this graph of differences, differences
of the logs over here.
And what we can see is a few interesting features--
and this is typical of all sorts of stock returns.
You should try this out.
First of all, it's noisy.
There are a lot of ups and downs.
Although the first graph on the left looks like Tootsie Roll
had a very successful period in this.
And the stock price rose a lot.
If we look at it day-by-day level, what we see
is lots of noise.
There lots of ups and downs.
If we even try to look at what the mean is,
if we try to eyeball and draw a line through it,
the line you see through it is the origin .
It's hard to say that the mean is
significantly different from 0.
And that's typically true on a one-day level
at high frequencies, financial data,
it's very difficult to discern what
the mean return is that will aggregate over
a long period of time.
But then we also notice that there are these spikes.
This is really not uniform volatility.
It doesn't look like uniform randomness.
And to compare that, look behind me at this graph here.
This shows a simulated white noise process.
White noise just means that we're
drawing from a random, normal distribution
with constant volatility.
And you can see that there's a pretty clear envelope function
here that's at around say, the equivalent of plus or minus
say, three standard deviation.
So I've normalized this graph on the right
to have the volatility equal to the empirical volatility
of Tootsie Roll.
So just kind of intuitively looking at the two,
does Tootsie Roll look like the random walk?
Those graphs look kind of different.
But obviously, that's not enough to make a definitive statement,
much less to tell us if a random walk isn't good,
what might be a better model for Tootsie Roll.
We can look at summary statistics.
And I've got a bunch of them here in R,
including ranges for the values over time.
And we can take a look at the distribution
for the statistics.
So we've got numbers overall.
For example, over time, the mean annualized return is 8 and 1/2%
with the volatility of 24%--
kind of typical numbers for a stock.
The histogram, we can take a look at--
how does it look to you?
So we've go, it's a single peak.
It's humped.
See if we can get that back, I'm sorry.
So it has a single peak.
It's humped in the middle.
Notice it looks kind of narrow and peaky, not nice
and rounded like a typical Gaussian distribution.
It has fat tails, which don't show up here
because the tails are really small.
But you might have heard of fat tail distribution.
A corollary of distributions, since the probability has
to sum to 1, is that if they've got fat tails,
then they also have to have thin middles.
There's less probability in the middle
than you would otherwise.
Notice that it is roughly symmetric.
That is upside and downside returns are about the same.
And we look at returns, not prices.
Why do you think that is?

You can try it, and take a look at the price distribution.
The reason that we expect that the return distribution,
from an investment perspective, is likely to be stationary.
That is the price levels are not, or shouldn't
be important to investors.
What matters is the return that you have.
So if the initial price is $10 or $100 or $1,000,
it shouldn't matter.
The price levels will depend on the actual history
of the stock, and where it started out and where it went.
Whereas in the case that we're especially interested in here
for, random walk-type behavior, the returns
are always going to be independent of where we start.
So prices would just introduce a lot of artifacts of history,
whereas the returns tell us what's actually going on.
And as I said, they are what's interesting for the investors.