
PROFESSOR: Now special case, if we let mu equal 0,
then that last term drops out.
If we let sigma equals 1, the three factor sigma
squared over 2 just becomes 1/2, and we
get the diffusion equation that we've already seen.
So the diffusion equation in its standardized form
is partial of p0, we'll call it.
We'll be thinking of a particular thing.
But in a general case, partial of p with respect to t
is 1/2 second partial of p with respect to z.
And there are no other constants here
just because I've set them to particular values.
Now this partial differential equation
has a lot of solutions.
But there's one that's very, very special,
and that's the standardized Gaussian.
p0 of z and t is equal to 1 over square root of t e to the minus
z squared over 2t.
And we'll see that the reason that this is special
is it will let us generate other solutions that
are of particular interest for finance
to the diffusion equation and some related equations.
But just taking it on its face, first
does it satisfy the equation?
Yep, it does.
It's special case, mu equals 0, sigma equals 1.
Take the partials, plug it in, try it out.
If you're stuck on the other one, do this one first.
It's a little bit easier.
There are fewer terms.
But this is just a special case.
So it satisfies the equation.
Second, how do we visualize it?
Well, this is a symmetric random walk.
The up and down probabilities are equal.
Mu is equal to 0, so it stays centered around the origin.
And as time goes on, the width still increases
and the curves get--
the peak gets lower and lower and the curves
get broader and broader over time.
If we run time backwards, as we go from large time
and approach t equals 0 from above, then
what we see is the peaks converge on the origin,
get narrower and narrower.
Because they're probability distributions, of course,
the area under the curve is always equal to 1.
Do note that this is only a solution to our equation
for positive values of t because we have this square root here,
and that would take us into the complex numbers, which
would be difficult to interpret as a probability.
So this is a special equation that
can be thought of as being concentrated
at the origin as t approaches 0 from above as we
run the clock backwards.
Now, this special solution can be used
to obtain the general solution.
I'd like to show you the formula,
and then we'll take a look at why it works.
So here's the formula.
If we've got some initial conditions, so at time 0,
we want a function p that at time 0 has some shape,
any shape you'd like.
Well, it can't be any shape.
It needs to be integrable.
So it needs to be somewhat reasonable, not grow too fast,
not have too many [? angularities ?]
or discontinuities.
But let's call that general function f.
So I'd like to have the solution to the diffusion equation
that, in addition, a t equals zero takes on a specified form.
And the answer to that, the general solution,
is to take our previous expression,
our special p0, our special Gaussian,
replace z by z minus w, multiply it times f of w,
and integrate over w.
And that's it.
So concretely, it's exactly this expression.
It's just a Gaussian integral.
You pick an f.
You plug it in.
You do an integration.
You get an expression.
And you can check by direct inspection
that it satisfies the equation.
For example, if you take f of z is z squared,
and you do this integral, you put in z squared,
make some changes of variables, you do the integral,
it's an ordinary Gaussian integral, definite integral,
from minus infinity to infinity, you
get the result because it's a function
that we integrate over w.
But the result is a function of z and t.
You get the answer z squared plus t.
And when t is equal to 0, we recover--
we recover the p of z and t at t equals 0 is z squared.
And it satisfies the differential equation,
as you can check.
How does it work?
Well, we need to do two things, check
that it satisfies the differential equation,
check that it satisfies the initial conditions.
The way that we check that it intensifies the differential
equation is to differentiate it, that is,
we take the differential operator of our diffusion
equation-- these operators-- which are linear operators,
and when they act on the function p of z,
t, we can move-- p of z, t is defined by an integral,
but the integral, of course, can be thought of as a sum.
It's a linear set of pieces for its arguments.
And if the integral is convergent,
I can move the differential operator
under the integral sign, where, because it depends on t and z,
it only acts on p0.
Everything else depends only on w.
And there no double w's in the differential operator.
So the differential operator in square brackets acts on p0,
and it gives 0.
So 0 times f of w is 0.
Integrating 0 minus infinity to infinity gives 0 again.
It satisfies the differential equation for any f.
This expression will work.
But does it satisfy the initial conditions?
So what we'd like to look at is what's
the limit as t goes to 0 from above
of that integral expression that we've seen,
that we've written down right here.
Well, we take the limit as t goes to 0 of our expression,
and we can substitute variables under the integral
if we define u to be w minus z over square root of t.
Then that takes out the z and the t dependents.
This becomes e to the minus u squared over 2.
The square root of t that we have here,
dw over square root of t, is going to be du.
So that's over here.
So the square root of t went away.
And the argument in f of w now gets shifted--
it becomes f of z--
plus u times square root of t.
If we're away from any singular points
in the function or discontinuities, then
as t goes to 0, this term vanishes.
I'm left with f of z, which is a constant with respect to u.
And the remaining integral is equal to 1.
It's a Gaussian interval.
It's normalized.
And I get f of z, which is the appropriate initial condition.