
PROFESSOR: There are a few functions
that help summarize some of the results.
We won't need these for everything we're doing,
but they are convenient to keep in mind
and you will see them certainly in the literature.
The first thing I'd like you to do
is take a look at this picture that typically we
see when representing the payoff for a call option
at expiration.
If we have a stock of price S and the strike price
at price K, the price at which the option can be exercised,
we only exercise if the price is above, say, K is 100,
S is $120, that means that we can buy a stock for $100
and sell it for $120 and our profit would be S minus K.
Or if S is below the strike price,
we wouldn't exercise it at all.
That would be a money-losing proposition.
And the value is 0.
So this is typically shown in a graph
like this, where it's flat for low values
and then it increases linearly above.
We can rewrite that in terms of the absolute value function
in a simple way, which you can check.
It's 1/2 of the absolute value of S minus K plus S minus K. So
if S is above K, this doubles.
And if S is below K the absolute value flips the sign of this
and we get 0.
The reason I wrote it that way is if I'd like to take--
consider taking the derivative of this function,
it's a lot easier in the absolute value form.
And if you look at the picture, you can see what we have.
The left for S below K, the slope is 0, the line is flat.
For S above K, the slope has line--
the line has slope 1.
So the first derivative of that function has a name.
It's called the theta function, or the heavy side function,
or the step function.
And its equ-- value is equal to 1 if S is bigger than K.
And it's equal to 0 if S is less than K. And the value at 0
depends slightly on how we define it,
either 0 or sometimes a 1/2.
We take it as the limiting case.
But in any event away from the point 0,
we see that it has this shape.
What do you think its derivative is?
Well, its derivative is 0.
That is the curve is flat on the left and flat on the right.
It's flat everywhere except at the origin where
the slope changes infinitely in an infinitesimal period of time
or in a 0 point of time.
And, in fact, this defines--
this-- we can represent something
called the Dirac delta function that
has the peculiar property that its 0 everywhere except when
its argument vanishes.
There it's equal to infinity.
But the area under its curve, which
is infinitely high and of 0 width, is equal to 1.
Now, it sounds strange.
But, in fact, one way to represent the delta function
is as the limit of our friend, our special solution
to the diffusion equation-- this Gaussian in the limit
where t goes to 0.
Now, we've seen that to get our special solution
and initial conditions that we can
take a limit of an integral-- change
variables inside the integral.
But sometimes we might want to take the limit directly.
And if we want to do so, this delta function notation--
thinking of this as the limit of the Gaussian,
it has these properties where its integral is equal to 1--
gives us a result sometimes more directly.
The properties that the delta function
has that are worth keeping in mind are the following.
We usually don't look at it on its own.
In fact, properly speaking, we can only look at it
in an integral integrated in--
against another function.
So one way that we see it is if I
take delta of x against f of x, gives me f of 0.
And this is sometimes called a generalized function
or a functional, which is something that takes functions
and maps them to real numbers.
So, in this case, this takes the function f of x.
And although I've written as an integral,
I get the value at a particular point.
The point is not always 0.
The point is wherever the argument of the delta function
vanishes.
So if it's delta of x minus y times
f of x, that gives me f of y.
And that is also--
gives us a way that you'll sometimes
see for summarizing the rule about the initial conditions
for our integral form of our general solution
to our partial differential equation.

If we have inhomogeneous equations where
we have something that doesn't depend
on our variable of interest on the right hand side,
then we can use these functions to generate general solutions
as well.
Although the results are a little bit more complicated,
I've written them down here.
And we're not going to be doing that right now,
but you will see them in the same discussions
of partial differential equations that we've had.
So you can know the functions that we're looking
at, the Green's functions-- this exponential--
this special Gaussian exponential form is of general
use and it lets us generate overall time-dependent
solutions where we might have a differential equation with
some, for example--
that doesn't depend on p on the right hand side,
but is some function of z and t on the right hand side.
And if I ask not what function p sets as equal to 0,
but what gives me a solution for an arbitrary h,
then these integral expressions, using my special function here,
let me generate a solution by doing an integral
where I have an arbitrary function h.