
PROFESSOR: We talked about initial conditions
for the diffusion equation, but more broadly
differential equations can be formulated
with boundary conditions that could appear
at different points in time.
Or they could be conditioned on the spatial variables
that we have.
So I'd like to talk about a few examples of boundary problems.
And a couple of tricks that are helpful in their solution.
The first trick that we'll take a look at
is called the method of images.
And the idea is that suppose we wanted
to take a look at the probability of getting
from point A over here to point B at this end.
If we just wanted to get from point A to point B,
and we're taking, say random walks
or going up and down by 1 unit, we know how to do that.
It's just combinatorics.
We count all the ways that we can get all the possible steps
to take us there.
But suppose I had a condition, and I
say I want you to get from A to B without crossing this line.
So here I've got this is 6.
I want to get to 8 in a certain number of time steps.
But I want to do it without ever crossing this boundary at 5.
That makes the counting much more complicated.
And in the continuous time case, which we want to get to,
makes it impossible.
How are we going to count the paths?
Well there are two things that we
can do to get away from counting the work in this case
and they generalize nicely to continuous time.
The first thing is we'll think about stating things
relative to the boundary.
We'll think about what it means to hit the boundary.
And the second thing we'll do is we'll
use an artificial construction that
will look at the mirror image of some parts
of our path in the boundary.
So let's take a look at this first case.
Suppose that if I want to get from point A
to point B without hitting C, I imagine that if I hit point C,
I'm dead.
So I want to know what the probability is to get there.
And we'll call that a survival probability.
How do I get from one place to another
without hitting an intermediate condition?
And it's something we've already talked
about in the context of Gambler's Ruin
where we hit a boundary and the game is over.
And we've looked at a number of discrete problems
where if there's a particular draw down
in a financial balance, then that
affects the outcome in which probabilities
contribute to a final answer.
So here we've got another version of the same thing.
But here's our approach to solving it.
What we're going to do is we're going
to say that, first of all, some paths will
go from A to B without ever hitting the boundary.
But there are some that do hit the boundary.
What we could do is instead of just counting the ones that
don't hit the boundary, we could count them all
and then subtract the ones that hit the boundary.
How do we do that?
Well, the way we can characterize all the paths that
hit the boundary is to notice that if they hit the boundary
one or more than one time, then they definitely
hit it at least once.
What I do is look at this blue path behind me.
What I do is I take a look at the first place where
it hits the boundary.
So I look at this blue path that starts above.
It hits the boundary here.
Then it goes below and above.
It hits it a second time.
It bounces around.
And finally it arrives at point B. So what I'm going to do
is I'm going to focus on this first crossing point.
This first place where it touches our barrier.
And around this point, I'm going to draw a mirror image.
And that's this red line.
So you notice that this red line is
this segment of the blue line reflected in the barrier.
So if this is one unit above the barrier,
this starts one unit below the barrier.
Everything after the first passage point
continues the same.
So these paths are in one to one correspondence.
For every path starting at A that gets to B
and hits the boundary, there is exactly
one path that starts at an image point below the boundary
and also finishes at B.
How many such plans are there?
Well that's an easy thing to count
because those are unrestricted.
Because every path where I've done
this reflection trick starts below the barrier.
And they all finish above the barrier.
They necessarily cross the barrier.
So the barrier is no restriction in the counting of these paths.
They all cross it if you want for free just
by virtue of where they're starting and endpoints are.
So if I want to compute the barrier,
now I have an easy rule.
I compute the probability to get from A to B unrestricted,
and I subtract the probability to get from the mirror
point, this fictitious point below the boundary, where
I never could be because otherwise I
would already by definition be out of the game.
We would be dead.
But to go from this fictitious point up to here.
And I subtract that probability, and that gives me
the survival probability.
Now this generalizes nicely for continuous time processes.
And it leads us to an interesting way
to think about boundary values for differential equations.
So in terms of our diffusion equation,
suppose we have a barrier at z star.
We start at some point z0 that has to be above z star.
Again, if we're at the barrier or below,
and where our survival probabilities is already
0 like our Gambler's Ruin problem,
the first thing I can do is I can say,
let's look at the unrestricted probability
to get from z0 to anywhere in time t.
And while I just measure my distance from z0
and z minus z0 in time t.
And that's given by p0.
I'd like to subtract the mirror image that is the probability
to get from the mirror point, which is 2z star minus z0.
And I want to subtract that probability.
Well, that's just the same p0 function.
p0 of z minus its origin, its starting point,
to z star minus z0, t.
And if I combine those two expressions,
I get this result right--
excuse me.
I get this result right here, which
you will notice is not a probability density.
And it shouldn't be.
It doesn't normalize to 1 because the longer time
goes on, the more chance there is
that we will have hit the boundary the less chance
there is that we will survive.
It certainly should be a positive quantity.
And you can check that it is.
Here's its most interesting property.
It obeys the property that when z is equal to z star,
it vanishes.
The two terms cancel each other out.
That's exactly what should happen.
z equals z star at any point t means
that we're at the boundary where we no longer survive.
So we could have started from the beginning
and said this is our boundary value on the problem.
We are looking for a function ps of z
and t that satisfies the diffusion equation such
that whenever it's evaluated and star any time t,
it's equal to 0.
That's an example of a boundary where in this case
a kind of barrier which we can't cross.
Now of course that solution is only a solution for t
greater than 0.
And it's only a solution above the barrier for z
greater than z star.
You'll notice that this expression here we've
written down doesn't exist for negative times.
That's OK because the square root.
But it does exist for all values of z that
is this expression makes sense.
But it doesn't really solve our differential equation
because if z were below z star, the probability has already
gone to 0, and we wouldn't want to get something negative.
The complete solution to this boundary value problem
is that the probability to survive to z and t
is given by 1 over the square root of 2 pi
t times this expression.
Minus the Gaussian exponential with the distance
measured from the image charge.
But if z is below is z star or equal, then the value is 0.

Now this was for a symmetric random walk
where there was no drifter.