
PROFESSOR: If there is a drift term,
then things change, and we can't really
use our symmetry argument.
We can't use the method of images.
And in fact, in our discrete case,
if our up and down probabilities were different,
that argument wouldn't have worked at all.
We could count the paths the same way,
but the weighting factors would have been different.
And we would have needed to adjust the weighting part,
even though the combinatorics would have been the same.
But we don't need to go that far to tweak our solution
to get a correct value.
And we'll do what we did in two ways.
The first thing is to notice that our boundary condition is
the same.
We want to have that the probabilities should
vanish whenever it z is equal to z star.
That's just the nature of the boundary.
So that's OK.
We know that if we have a linear combination of two
solutions to the diffusion equation, by linearity
it's also a solution.
So let's not toss our solutions away.
Let's see if maybe instead of just taking the difference,
if a different weighted average of the two
might be able to work.
So what we're going to do is we're going to make a guess.
We'll put in a particular form.
We'll see what would be required by that form.
And then we'll see if we can come up
with a general solution.
So the form I'm going to try is I'm
going to suppose that all I need to do
is multiply by some constant C. And the constant C would
be equal to 1 if mu were equal to 0,
but I don't know what it is.
It's going to be some function of mu that
vanishes when-- or that goes to 1 when mu is equal to 0.
So it certainly satisfies the differential equation.
That's great.
What happens when z equals z star?
Well, I want to set it equal to 0.
So if I put in that condition, and I
require that this expression be equal to 0 and z equal z star,
I can solve for C. OK.
Just by dividing, I have this expression
in parentheses is equal to 0.
That means I have the ratio of these two exponentials.
And I find that C is equal to e to the minus 2
mu z0 minus z star over sigma squared.
So if mu is equal to 0, it checks the condition
that we needed.
C is equal to 1.
So this satisfies our differential equation
because it's the difference of solutions,
and it satisfies our boundary conditions
because, by construction, when z is equal to z star,
the function vanishes, the two terms cancel each other out.
Now, suppose we want to know our survival probability at a given
point in time, that is, not to get to a particular terminal
point z, but to finish anywhere above the boundary.
Well, I have the probability density.
ps of z and t dz tells me the probability in time t
that I'll have reached some point between z and z plus dz.
Let's integrate it over all z, but only those z's that
are above the boundary.
Well, our integrand is going to be a Gaussian type exponential
with a Gaussian prefactor, and with some cut off
on the integral.
And that means that we can express everything
in terms of a cumulative distribution function
from the Gaussian.
And I'm going to note that by the function phi.
And it shows up all over the place.
Whenever we're dealing with Gaussians,
phi is defined to be the definite integral from
minus infinity to x of the Gaussian kernel 1
over square root of 2 pi e to the minus x squared over 2.
So I'm integrating, but only up to x.
It has a nice symmetry property for phi of minus x.
And you can get that to change the limits of integration.
And the result that we get when we do the integral is I
get two terms, both in phi.
I have phi here with this argument.
And I have another phi here with a different argument.
And I have a little exponential prefactor.
So this is my solution.
You notice that it depends on time.
It depends on my starting point.
It depends, in fact, not just on the starting point,
but it depends on z0 minus z.
That is, it depends on how far away I am from the barrier
initially.
If mu is a positive number, then on average--
or a negative number, actually, for that matter--
then this thing in the numerator is, on average,
how far I expect what my expected location is,
how far away am I going to be.
If mu is big, then this increases over time,
and it means I'm getting farther and farther
away from the barrier.
And this denominator square root of sigma
squared t gives me a measure as to how much diffusion
I typically would expect in time t.

Now, let's think of places where we might apply this.

Suppose we want to think about the probability of default
or a firm.
And the default could be that the firm runs out of money
and that the equity goes to 0, or it could be a trigger point.
There could be some particular financial term
that's a covenant in a bond, let's say.
But let's keep things simple.
Let's picture a firm that's represented by debt and equity.
So its resources our D plus E. That's the value of the firm.
z, we'll that be the firm value.
We'll let z star be the case when the equity goes to 0, when
the shareholders are wiped out, and we're
on the borderline where the value of the firm
might be less than the outstanding debt that's owned.
So that's z star.
Certainly, we don't want the value
of our firm to go below z star.
What's the probability of that happening?
Well, let's start with the current value
z0 to be the firm value, and let's assume that we've
got some positive equity.
Then we know how to solve the problem.
That's the survival probability that we just computed.
It says, in a given amount of time,
what's the probability that you don't default?
And that's-- now we can think about what that's a function
of.
Well, it depends on the rate of growth of the firm, mu.
It depends on the capital reserves, on z0 minus z star.
That's how much initial capital we have.
So by having a good capital buffer--
and you can check this--
the larger the capital buffer is,
the higher the survival probability
is, which certainly makes sense.
But we could turn this around and think of this as something
to solve for.
If you're raising money for your startup,
instead of just seeing how much money you can get,
or who's offering you the best terms,
or what might be the return that they're demanding,
you might ask a very personal question close
to the heart, which is, what are the chances of my business
surviving?
How does it depend on the capital?
And if I want to minimize my default probability,
if I want to minimize my extinction
probability for a business, how much capital do I need?
That is, we can solve what the capital resources are
to achieve a particular probability level for default.
We can also think about two different things
that both contribute.
One of them is how much initial capital we have,
and the other is what the rate of growth of the firm is.
Obviously, for a slow growth rate,
we're going to be mostly dependent
on the initial buffer.
If it's expected to have a high growth rate,
then that might not be as important.
This also shows up in a slightly different version in a number
of insurance problems.
We have some capital base.
We have a possibility of claim premiums
that, usually, we would model is a jump process,
not a diffusion process.
But we do need to balance that against the rate of growth,
the rate of income through premiums
that might be needed, ultimately,
to offset negative fluctuations that would show up.
So we can think about this as representing real events
for things that might happen, represented
by a boundary, the likelihood of a particular event.
And it's not something we can formulate in advance,
and saying this happens at a particular time,
so this could have happened anywhere.
And this helps us answer the question,
a somewhat path-dependent question,
without getting into the paths.
What's the probability to get from A to B
without hitting some event, in this case a barrier,
along the way?
Here's a numerical example of this problem you can find
worked out in detail in the book Fixed Income Finance
by Wise and Bhansali.
And they take the example where mu is 1%, sigma is 25%,
and the z0 minus z is a half.
And we can see how the survival probability evolves over time.
And, as we would expect, the longer we wait,
the more it goes down because you have more and more chances
for something bad to happen.
And we can see that we have this initial behavior here,
and then it drops off over time.
And here we look at the point where it reaches 50%.
At the end of 10 years, you can go back
and rerun the numbers using that closed form expression
to see how things behave with the different growth rate.
How does that change the survival probabilities?
How does that compare to changing the initial capital
buffer?