
PROFESSOR: In looking at probability densities,
we were asking a question about the likelihood
of finding a random walk or possibly
the value of financial asset at some time in the future
under an uncertain set of probability assumptions.
But we don't just need to ask about the value of the stock,
or the value of an underlying, or the value of a random walk.
We can ask about the value of functions
of any of those things.
So we can ask about more general future payoffs.
We can ask about general derivatives.
How they behave in the future if their function
say of a random walking stock price.
And we can compute not only the distributions,
but some expectations.
What we're going to see is these expectations satisfied
differential equations.
And the differential equations are going to be quite familiar.
So let's go back now to our stock prices.
If we remember, our standard model
for a stock diffusion for geometric Brownian motion,
it's given by this EDO process.
dS is mu Sdt plus sigma SdB.
And we know that by changing to logarithmic variables,
that the logarithm of S is a random walk with the drift
and a volatility coefficient.
And therefore, it has a probability density.
It's going to be a little bit more complicated
because the logarithms.
But it's an example of the logarithm.
And S is an example of everything
that we've looked at in looking at probability density
functions that vary with time that solve the diffusion
equation.
So when there's a drift term, remember we have an extra part.
The Fokker Planck equation or the backward equation.
And the probability density in logarithmic variables,
if we flip them back now to--
if we go from log variables where
log S represents a random walk back to our original S,
and we create the analogous probability density,
the probability of arriving at ST a time big T given
that we started at price at this time T
satisfies a differential equation.
And that differential equation has all the plus sides.
And it takes this form partial of p with respect
to t plus a familiar pre-factor sigma S squared over 2.
Second partial of p with respect to S
squared plus an unfamiliar term with the mu with the drift
coefficient times S partial of p with respect to S.
It's familiar in our context of random walk probability
densities.
But it's not one that we saw when
we derive the Black-Scholes equation, which you remember
is independent of the value of the drift term mu.
So here we have in terms of S variables
the differential equations satisfied by the probability
density or a stock that follows its standard EDO process.

Now we can compute some expectation values.
And we do this in the usual way where we take the probability
weighted average.
So suppose I have some function.
It's a function of S sub T of the terminal values.
And I'd like to compute its expectation at an earlier time
t.
Well, I compute that by taking my probability density.
I multiply it times the function in question.
I take the probability weighted average.
I integrate over all the values ST. And that's my expectation.
The kind of thing that we have in mind
is going to be something like the payoff on a call option
where big T represents the time when the option expires.
So to compute an expectation, we compute this probability
weighted average.
We do the integral and we're done.
Notice that inside the integral, the coordinates
from the starting point big S and are just S and T
are constants inside the integral.
They don't do anything they're not integrated against.
So the result is some function of the stock price and time.
So the expected value where we're
computing the expectation of some terminal values at time
T is itself a function of the starting point S and T.
And It satisfies the same differential equation as p.
The equation that we wrote down on the previous slide.
So f satisfies a differential equation.
It also has interesting initial conditions.
In the limit where little t goes to big T,
we think this is arriving at the expected value.
We can go through the same argument
either by looking at the Gaussian form
here, and changing variables in the interval.
Or by using the delta function to say
that when the big T goes to little t,
the probability density approaches delta function.
Either way we do it, we find it satisfies
the initial conditions that this large value when
little t goes to big T takes the expected result.
No pun intended.
f of S because this will be f of S evaluated
at the terminal point S sub t where it's
no longer random because we're evaluating at time big T what
the value will be a time big T.
Let's take things one step further.
Let's think about f and compute its present value.
So the present value is the discounting
under the continuous risk free rate.
It's e the minus RT of some quantity.
That is, we think of the future values
as being what their value would be
if they earned compound interest at a rate r continuously
compounded for a given period of time.
The present value reverses that.
It says let's find out the value now
that would be required to get a given future value.
So I'm going to define V to be the present value of F
where I'm going to multiply it times the usual factor
that we see in finance.
e to the minus r times the amount
of time left to expiration, which in this case
is big T minus little t.
Now what equation does V satisfy?
e to the minus rT times F is just
e minus rT minus t times the expectation.
But remember we saw that f of St is just the terminal
value of our function.
So we can rewrite this as the present value
of the expectation of V itself evaluated
at the terminal value.
That is to say that V anad S sub t at an initial time
is equal to the discounted present value
of the expectation of the terminal value.
And this expectation, of course, is computed with probability
density p.