
PROFESSOR: The quantity V satisfies a differential
equation that's very similar to the Black-Scholes equation.
The prefactor we put in front, the e to the minus rt minus t,
the discounting factor adds an extra term minus rV
when we take time partials with respect to it.
One partial acts on the prefactor,
the other partial acts on the function
V, and we can cancel out an overall prefactor
in the equation.
So the equation that's satisfied by V
looks very similar to Black-Scholes,
except there's a mu here.
And what we ought to have is an r where we see a mu.
Now, V would satisfy the Black-Scholes equation
if instead it were based on this Ito process.
dS equals rSdt plus sigma SdB.
That is, if we changed the drift rate
and replaced it by the risk-free rate,
then the equation would be Black-Scholes.
And what that means is that if we
want to solve the Black-Scholes equation, what we can do
is take the expression we wrote down for V, everywhere where
we see mu, cancel it out and replace it
by r, and that's going to satisfy this differential
equation.
Now, there's a reason for this that we're not driving here,
but you'll see it in the finance portion of the MicroMasters
course.
And what you'll see is that this is called risk-neutral pricing.
Risk neutral you can think of as meaning that there's
no particular compensation for risk,
that all assets under risk-neutral pricing
and under risk-neutral probabilities
grow at the risk-free rate.
So under this assumption that we're using the risk-neutral
measure, sometimes called Q-measure,
and that the Ito process evolves not with a real-world value mu,
but with this fictitious drift rate r--
under that set of assumptions, then we
can find a solution to the Black-Scholes equation.
And we know that the V that we wrote down before
solves that, provided we make that substitution.
And here is the relationship that we have
that V must satisfy.
The e to the minus rt times V at S of t at an earlier time
is equal to the expectation of e to the minus r big T
at a later time of the value of the function evaluated
at that later time, where this expectation is taken
by averaging over the probabilities
for all possible values of ST at future time
big T under the probability density that is not
the real-world one with mu, but the risk-neutral one
where r has replaced mu.

So there are two ways that we can get Black-Scholes equations
doing this.
One of them is we can do the integral.
The other way is we can evaluate that expectation
that we wrote down.
So the Monte Carlo techniques, which
we'll see a little bit later, involve
taking that expected value and replacing it
by an arithmetical average instead of theoretically
computing the weighted average of all possible outcomes
for all possible price evolutions.
Under this risk-control measure, we'll compute a set of them,
a large number of them, and we'll take an average.
The other way is we just plug in and do some integrals.
That is, we already have the probability density functions,
so let's compute V from the integral formula
that we wrote down.
We can think of V as being an expectation over terminal
values.
But in the end, we just have some integrals to do.
So let's take a look at an example where, for instance,
we think of a call option with strike price K at time big T,
and we're at time little t currently.
Well, V of St in the present--
that should be a big S--
is going to be the probability density times the terminal
value.
And when we substitute in our definitions
for our specific payoff that we want,
we get this integral expression here, which we can do.
And we can take x and x prime, which
were logarithmic variables from our original change
in variables, and change them back and do the integral.
Or to be more explicit, we can write
this formula using our results.
So the full risk-neutral probability distribution
when we change back from logarithmic variables
to s where x was log s and we change back,
we have this expression down here
is just the probability density.
It looks pretty big and ugly, but that's because
of our changes of variables.
This really is everything that we
began with for the basic probability
density for a set of random walks
with a drift coefficient mu.
Now, this is a Gaussian probability density.
We're going to do a Gaussian integral.
This piece here is the exponential weighting
from the discounted present value.
And then for my payoff function, I'm going to put in S minus K.
And it's easier to do the integral
if we work in exponential variables
and try to have these logarithms inside the integral.
So a change of variables is helpful here.
We can go from this exact result.
By letting x equal log S, we have this.
Recognize this is in a Gaussian form.
And let's take a look at three features.
The first feature is like in our barrier case,
we have a lower limit of integration.
If the stock price is below K, there's no value,
there's no contribution.
The payoff function is 0.
If we're above the strike price, there are two.
Terms there's S minus K. So we can do two different intervals.
The second one is easy.
K is just a constant.
It comes outside.
And this is going to give us something in phi.
It's going to give us a cumulative distribution
function because I have just e to the minus x
squared over 2 in the appropriate units integrated
from something to infinity.
So that's going to give me something
in phi, where phi, as usual, is defined in this way.
And the other term is not much harder.
Because this is e to the x prime,
I complete the square in the exponent, do the integrals,
and I'll get another function phi.
So the result of plugging this in and changing back
the variables is we get the Black-Scholes solution, S times
phi evaluated at argument I'll call d plus.
In literature, these are often called d1 in d2.
I like to write them as d plus and d minus.
But I have one term in d plus minus the present value
of the strike price Ke to the minus r T minus t times
phi of d minus.
So the definition of d plus and d minus,
they really just come from changing
variables in the integral and looking
at the limits of integration.
In this case, d plus or minus is this first expression
plus or minus 1/2 sigma squared root of T.
And this first expression does have
an interesting interpretation.
So the logarithms are-- because it's
price changes and relative returns on stocks
that matter more than price levels, the ratio
that we see here is the ratio of the stock price
S, the current price, to the present value
of the strike price.
Or we could turn it around and ask about the forward value
of the stock price relative to the strike price, which would
be what we'd see at expiration.
So this numerator is a measure of how far
we are in or out of the money.
If S is larger than the denominator,
the logarithm is going to be the logarithm of a number that's
bigger than 1.
And if it's below, it will be the logarithm
of a number that's less than 1, which
will be a negative number.
And it'll be 0 if the function-- not if it's not the money,
not if S is equal to K, but if it's at the money forward
and if that ratio inside the logarithm should vanish.
So that's a measure of how far away
we are from the at the money forward value.
And the denominator, the sigma over square root
of T minus t, that's telling us how far the stock
price, or the log stock price more
precisely would be expected to diffuse given the volatility
sigma and the time remaining until expiration.
