
PROFESSOR: Now, it's customary and of incredible practical
importance for risk management to take a look at a couple
of related quantities, having solved the Black-Scholes
equation and found the Black-Scholes formula in puts--
for calls, which we wrote down in puts,
which are very similar.
The first thing is the famous delta,
which we used as part of our hedging argument.
So we know that delta is defined as the partial of V
with respect to S. Now that we have a closed form
expression for V, we can take the derivatives,
and we can compute.
And we find these values, that the delta for a call
is phi of d plus, where the argument is
the previous one that we wrote down,
phi of minus d plus for a put.
And there's a relationship between the two deltas
for puts and calls that follows from a relationship
that you'll see in the foundations of finance,
that put-call parity tells us that the value
of a call minus the value of a put
is always equal to the stock price minus the present value
of the strike price.
So if we differentiate this once with respect to S,
we get the delta of the call minus the delta of the put
is equal to 1.
If we take two derivatives, we find out
the gamma, the second derivative of an option value with respect
to stock price, is the same for both puts and calls.
And the vega is the value of the option with respect to sigma.
And this is a little bit different from the others
because sigma isn't a dynamical variable.
It's not a variable at all.
It's just a parameter.
We don't usually think about differentiating with respect
to parameters.
But it is important in thinking about the solution
because it tells us about the sensitivity to changes
and levels of volatility.
If sigma were non-constant, our derivation for Black-Scholes
would not hold, at least not the way we did it.
We'd need to generalize it a bit.
But if we are holding options, we
might be interested in what would happen to their value
if, say, there were, I don't know,
a global pandemic and everyone's understanding of risk change.
And while the volatility is constant,
it jumped to a new level, or it moved a small amount
to a new level.
That would be one reason where it
would be helpful to know what the sensitivity of the value
is with respect to a change in sigma.
Now, in addition to puts and calls,
that are vanilla options, our approach
lets us solve for any payoff at all.
Remember, we could put any terminal function
V or any general function f into our equation.
We can have any payout we want at time big T,
and all we need to do is do an integral to get that equation.
So that's why this is much more powerful than just having
a bunch of formulas that we can look up in a book or online
for different categories for solutions to Black-Scholes.
If you would like to generate a particular payoff,
you know how to do it.
Write down what you would like the function
to look like at expiration.
Do the interval.
That will tell you what the value of the option should be.
Here's one example that's even easier
than doing a put or a call.
It's a binary, or sometimes called the digital option, that
doesn't pay off proportionally.
It's like a bet.
Either it pays off or it doesn't.
So if the strike price finishes above K, you get $1.
If it finishes below, you get nothing.
And if we plug that in the integrand is even easier.
It's either 1 or 0.
The only effect of this is to cut off
the lower limit of integration in S of big T
at the strike price.
And we do the integral, and no surprise,
we end up with a Gaussian cumulative distribution
function phi with an appropriate argument.
So this is the value.
There's only one term, not two.
And you notice that it is not multiplied times an S or a K
because it doesn't have units of--
scale of the stock price.
It just pays $1 in that limit.
Now, this is directly related to-- because it depends on phi,
and we talked about how we can think about d, it's related,
as you might expect, to the probability
of finishing in the money.
After all, a fair bet would be--
would pay off based on what the probability of winning is.
That ought to be what the value is.
But that's not quite what's going on here
because, in fact, the probability distribution
that we're using to compute, the probability distribution
inside our integrals is the risk-neutral distribution.
So even if we knew the return on our underlying mu,
we wouldn't use it.
And this is a little bit counterintuitive.
So the value of the payoff is not
related to the probability of finishing in the money.
It is related to the probability of finishing
in the money under the risk-neutral distribution,
but that could be wildly different
in the real-world probability of finishing in the money.
Why is that?
Well, our normal gambling intuition
says that we have all these different, uncertain outcomes,
and we start by asking what would be fair.
And the expected value is their typical definition
of what's fair.
But in the case of these options,
where the derivatives and the underlying have the same
stochastic driver-- they're based on related Ito
processes--
we can eliminate risk, as we've seen.
There is no risk at all.
So the value needs to be such that it avoids arbitrage.
If you know the arbitrage value, and someone comes up
with a different value through other arguments that
don't take into account the possibility of eliminating
risk, you've got a great opportunity to make a trade.

Here's another example of an exotic option with no strike
price involved at all, and a different technique
where we don't need to do the same kind of integrals
because we don't have a complicated payoff.
The payoff that we have, in fact,
is-- we're going to assume that the payoff is
as S squared and some appropriate unit.
So let's say that we measure S in dollars,
and at expiration, you get S squared dollars,
whatever that might be.
So how are we going to compute that?
Well, we want to think about what the evolution is
and about what the expectation is,
and we want to apply our result that the value of an option
is the discounted present value of the expectation
of the terminal value under the risk-neutral measure.
So let's take those words and those formulas for expectations
and put them into play.
And what we see is, first of all,
that log X is just twice as log S.
We know that log S is a Brownian motion-- an arithmetic,
not a lognormal Brownian motion, because we've taken logarithm.
So we know what d of log S is.
And d of log X is just twice d of log S.
So that means that a time t, where we can let t be zero,
it's going to be the initial value
S squared times e to twice mu minus sigma
squared over 2 times t plus--
because it's a random walk, because log S is a random walk
and log X is some random walk, we're
going to represent this as plus sigma squared
root of t times Z.
So here's my 2, and going from X--
excuse me, going from S to X, this
is what we normally would have gotten by integrating our log
S. And because it's a square, we just
end up with the factor of 2.
Going to the risk-neutral measure means that we take mu,
and we just replace it by r.
That's our heuristic, and it really works.
So we take mu, we replace it by r,
and then we need to compute the expectation with respect
to the Gaussian probability distribution.
Again, what I've called Q-measure means don't use mu.
Where you see mu, write r.
So we'd like to do some Gaussian integrals of this expression,
where we replace u by r.
And then we recognize Z as being a Gaussian variable.
We do the expectations, and what we're
left with is an expression with r minus sigma squared over
2 times T e to the 2 sigma squared T,
and then when we take its discounted present value
e to the minus rT, we get this final result,
that the value of the option is going to be
the current value squared.
And let's let T be the--
so we're at time T equals zero right now times e
to the rT plus sigma squared T.