
PROFESSOR: Another example of boundary conditions
in our differential equations is looking
at the exercise conditions.
More American options.
The European option is an option that
can only be exercised at its expiration date.
An American option is one that can
be exercised at the discretion of the holder
of a long position.
The option any time up until exercise.
So the owner has to choose whether or not
to exercise early.
And if to exercise when or under what conditions.
And we can't apply our previous formulas really held
for European exercise because those
covered the entire domain.
But once an option holder exercises his or her option,
that option is no longer there.
And the solution would no longer be valid.
So we have a different kind of boundary condition.
Now this is actually a fairly complicated subject.
We're going to look at one very, very special example.
And that's going to be to consider
an option that never expires.
And we'll consider a put option.
So the put option is something that pays off
if the value goes down.
If value is below the strike price.
And the amount that it pays off is
equal to the amount by which is below the strike price.
Basically, the put option gives you the right, but not
the obligation to sell at price K.
So you would never do that if the price were above K.
You would sell at the market price.
But if the price drops low, then you
might choose to exercise and sell at K.
If the price goes to 0, obviously you
might as well exercise it early because that's
the maximum amount of money you can get.
The stock price never can go below 0.
The maximum value you can ever get is K.
So if the price were to hit 0, you would certainly exercise.
But it might be the case and if the price
gets sufficiently low, you would exercise as well.
So let's see if that might be the case.
The interesting thing about the perpetual option
is because it never expires the value is time independent.
So this is a way to get an equation that's
simpler than the partial differential equations.
It's going to be an ordinary differential equation.
So the value can only depend on the stock price.
It doesn't matter if it's been bouncing around for an hour
or for a year.
The value only depends on what the current stock
price is because the time never ever enters into the problem.
So the equation we have is very simplified Black-Scholes
where V depends only on S. And we drop the time derivative.
So this is the equation that we have
that's for any time independent contract that satisfies
the Black-Scholes equation.
Now this equation in order to solve it,
we're going to try a particular form.
We're going to look for an inspired guess.
See if we get lucky.
See if it might work.
And if it does, what conditions are
there so that we can get any arbitrary parameters exactly
right.
So the guess that we're going to try here is to try a power law.
And the motivation for that guess
is to notice this is homogeneous in its weight in S.
This doesn't have any S this is just a V. This
has an S in the numerator.
One in the denominator.
This has 2 in the numerator.
2 in the denominator.
So let's see what happens.
If I take V of S as S to some power,
if I differentiate it I'm going to get s to the alpha--
I'm going to get alpha S to the alpha minus 1.
I multiply by S. And now I've got S to the alpha again.
If I take two derivatives, I'm going
to end up with something-- or actually specifically alpha
times alpha minus 1.
S to the alpha minus 2.
I multiply S squared, I'm going to get us to the alpha again.
So if I do that, I divide through by S to the alpha.
I get an equation or alpha for these coefficients
that come from these equations.
And then it's a quadratic equation in alpha.
So I solve the quadratic equation.
And I find there are two possible values.
a equals 1 or minus 2r over sigma squared.
Now a equals 1 would have been easy to guess.
a equals 1 says that the value is S.
And the stock price itself always satisfies
the Black-Scholes equation.
But we also know that that can't be part of the solution
because it grows as S grows to infinity.
And the value of a put should be a decreasing function
in the stock price.
So that can't be part of the solution.
What about the other one?
Well, assuming that interest rates are positive,
and volatility of course, is positive we're
going to get S to the minus 2r over sigma squared.
So our solution has to be something of this form.
There's a overall proportionality constant.
But the S dependence has to be power law in S decreasing.
And that will satisfy this differential equation.

We might choose to exercise the price is sufficiently low.
And when we exercise, the value of the option
will be equal to its exercise price.
Because otherwise there would be an arbitrage opportunity value
where higher or lower.
Though at the exercise point, we have
that whatever it is S hat, that the value of the option
is going to be K minus S hat.
And that lets us rewrite our form in terms of we've
just traded one unknown for another unknown.
In this case S hat.
Now the way that we can think about the value
is that the person holding the long position
who has the choice as to whether to exercise
or not might choose to maximize his or her value.
The person with the short position
has to assume that because that's sort of the worst case.
If the person who holds the option
doesn't take advantage of an exploration opportunity,
that's good.
That's extra value.
But that isn't something that you'd
want to count on if you were managing risk,
and you were in the business of writing options.
So let's assume that the option holder will try
to optimize maximize its value.
And we can compute by differentiating with respect
to this parameter that's a choice.
This S hat.
And see what maximizes the value.
And then that will pin down what our final value for the option
is.
So the first part of this is something that
showed up on a problem set.
This part completes the problem.
You can try it out first before you look at these formulas.
But otherwise, if you're looking at them now,
and you want to see how it goes to finish things up,
we see that the first partial setting it to 0
gives us the solution for S hat.
We can check that this is a maximum and not a minimum
by looking at second derivatives.
And then if we substitute S hat into the expression
above, we finally get this result for the value
of the American option in terms of S and K.
The parameters sigma and r.
And obviously time doesn't appear in the problem.