
PROFESSOR: The generalization of Ito's lemma
to multiple variables is straightforward.
And we won't go through the same derivation here.
We'd just like to tell you the result
and show you a couple examples.
If we have multiple variables X, then we
can imagine that each of them is an Ito process,
with the difference that the coefficient functions could
depend on any of the other variables.
So the generalization is that I let
i run from 1 through, say, n.
And for each dXi, each of the coefficient functions ai or bi
can depend on time, plus all of the other X's.
Now, this is dt.
There's only a single time.
But I'm introducing a Brownian motion
dBi for each possible process.
Now, some applications of this are
where we might have multiple assets,
like a whole bunch of stocks in a portfolio or in an index.
We might have a factor model where
we try to describe the market in terms
of a small number of factors.
If it were the capital asset pricing model, or CAPM,
we might try to describe many stocks in terms
of a single stochastic driver.
If it were a factor model, we might
try to describe the covariant structure observed
among multiple stocks with a small number of factors
and have a covariance matrix that's
perhaps of less than full rank.
So all those cases would be examples where we
would have multiple variables.
And when we have multiple variables,
the only thing we need to be concerned about
is the possibility that they might be correlated.
So the first terms in our multidimensional Ito's lemma
are the same that we saw before.
We have partial of F with respect to dt.
For each of the X's, we have an independent term,
partial of F with respect to X times dX,
which is its own Ito process for X1, X2, X3.
And the diagonal terms here when i is equal to j,
row ij, the correlation between i and j is equal to 1.
And this gives us our usual Ito term.
But there are a whole lot of extra terms
that can arise if the Brownian motions are
correlated with each other.
And there's a simple heuristic which
generalizes what we did before.
So in the diagonal cases, dB squared,
dBi squared, dB1 squared, or dB2 2
squared, and so on gets replaced by a dt.
In dX1 squared, it's replaced by b1 squared dt, same as we
had before, ordinary Ito.
But if b1 and b2 have correlation rho 12,
then the product of these two differentials
is going to be, in probability, equivalent
to replacing it by row ij dt.
So that gives us this full term, where
what used to be a single second partial derivative with respect
to X is now replaced by a matrix of second partial derivatives
where they're multiplied times the correlation
coefficients times the b factors for each of those weights.
For example, suppose I've got two stochastic variables
and I have F as their product X1 X2.
I apply Ito's lemma, and I see that I get X1 dX2 plus X2
dX1 plus dX1 times dX2.
And I haven't yet said what either of those Ito processes
are for X1 or X2, but we already can
simplify by dividing through by F in this case.
So if I divide through by X1 X2, I get a very simple form.
dF over F is dX1 over X1 plus dX2 over X2 plus their product.
Now, suppose we apply that for a specific case.
Say we have geometric Brownian motion,
so suppose for X1 and X2 that both of them have dXi over Xi
is an individual mu dt plus an individualized sigma dB,
then I would have the dF over F is
going to be mu 1 plus mu 2, the sum of the drift rates,
plus an Ito term plus two Brownian terms, sigma 1, sigma
2.
If rho 12 goes to 0, this ends up just
being the sum the two Ito processes directly.

Suppose we take the ratio, so I take X1 over X2.
Well, if we go through and apply the same rules
and divide through by F, we find a somewhat more complicated
expression.
Ratios are a little bit harder to differentiate, so that's OK.
But let's take a look at this special case,
and we'll see a little bit of a paradox that's
here that you can think about.
If the coefficient in rho 12 is zero,
so the two processes are uncorrelated,
then we have this expression.
We don't need to worry about the minus sign here.
You might be a little bit worried
that there's a minus sign in front of the drift term,
but remember, it depends only on sigma squared,
so the minus sign makes no difference.
It's not as though there is risk canceling out between these two
in the event where they're uncorrelated.
On the other hand, suppose mu 1 equals mu 2,
the drift rates are equal.
This term is strictly positive.
It depends on sigma 1 squared as the asset in the Ito
process, the stochastic process, in the denominator divided
by X1 squared.
So in the event the mu 1 equals mu 2,
these terms vanish, the coefficient is positive,
and we have a positive drift term.
Now, the question is, how could that be the case?
Because if I applied this to X1 over X2
and I let F measure the growth rate of X1 relative to X2,
how can that be positive at the same time
that the growth rate of X2 relative to X1
is also positive?
