
PROFESSOR: In our third and final question,
we have the following setup.
A company enters into a forward contract
with a bank to sell a foreign currency for K sub 1 at a time
T sub 1.
The exchange rate at time T sub 1
proves to be greater than K sub 1.
And let's call that exchange rate S sub 1.
The company asks the bank if it can roll the contract forward
until time T2 rather than settle at time T sub 1.
The bank agrees to a new delivery price K2.
Explain how K2 should be calculated.
Now, we have a lot of letters and numbers
floating around here.
So let's get some convention right at the beginning.
As a convention, let's assume that the exchange rate
is quoted as a number of units of domestic currency per unit
of foreign currency.
So if the exchange rate goes up, then the foreign currency
has appreciated, that is its price
in terms of the domestic currency has increased.
Also, note that the bank has a long position
in the forward contract and hence
has agreed to buy the foreign currency in the future.

First, let's find the value of the forward contract
to the bank at time T1.
Since the spot exchange rate S1 at T1
is greater than the forward exchange rate K1,
the bank can purchase the foreign currency
at a lower price using the forward contract
than it can on the spot market.
Thus, the value of the foreign contract to the bank
is equal to the cost savings from purchasing
the foreign currency with the foreign contract, which
is S1 minus K1.
Now, how will the bank optimally choose the new delivery price
K2 at T2?
Well, to be as well off as before, the bank requires
the value of this new rolled forward contract at T1
to be equal to S1 minus K1.
This implies that S1 times the exponential
of negative Rf, where Rf is the foreign risk-free rate,
times T2 minus T1 minus K2 times the exponential of negative R,
where R is the domestic risk-free rate,
times T2 minus T1 is equal to S1 minus K1, where
both the risk-free rates, domestic and foreign,
are observed at T1 and applicable to the period
between T1 and T2.

Now, let's stare at that equation a little bit more.
The first term on the left-hand side,
S1 times the exponential of negative Rf times T2 minus T1,
is the present value of investing S1 units
the foreign currency at the foreign risk-free rate of Rf
from T1 to T2.
The second term on the left-hand side,
K2 times the exponential of negative R times T2 minus T1,
is the present value of investing
K2 units of the foreign currency at the domestic risk-free rate
of R from T1 to T2.
If we solve for K, we see that K2
is equal to S1 minus the exponential of the difference
between the domestic and the foreign risk-free rate and T2
minus T1 minus S1 minus K1 times the exponential
of the domestic risk-free rate times T2 minus T1.
So what does all this mean?
Well, what this means is that there are two components to K2.
The first is the forward price at time T1.
And the second one is an adjustment
to the forward price that is equal to the bank's
gain on the first part of the contract compounded forward
at the domestic risk-free rate.
Now that concludes our first recitation for 15.435x.
I look forward to seeing all of you next week.