
PROFESSOR: OK.
Now, let's move on to the second problem of the recitation.
Problem 2 states that a stock is expected
to pay a dividend of $1 per share in two months
and also in five months.
The stock price is currently $50 and the risk-free rate
of interest is 8% per annum with continuous compounding
for all maturities.
An investor has just taken a short position
in a six month forward contract on the stock.
In the first part of the question,
we are asked what are the forward price
and the initial value of the forward contract?

The easiest way to solve this problem
is to break it down into three steps.
In step one, we'll use a given risk-free rate
to find the present value of the stocks expected dividends.
First, the notation.
Let lowercase t denote the time in years and r
be the continuously compounded constant risk-free rate
expressed as a decimal.
As we saw in Professor Lucas's first lecture,
we can discount any cash flow arriving at time t
back to the present using the expression PV equals
D times the exponential of negative r times
t on a continuous basis, where D is the cash flow,
in this case in dollars, and PV is its present value.

Deploying that definition, we can find the present value
of the $1 dividends that we expect
to receive in both 2 and 5 months
as I, which equals 1 times the exponential of negative 0.08
for the 8% risk-free rate times 2/12 for the two month dividend
plus 1 times the exponential of negative 0.08
times 5/12 for the five month dividend,
which is roughly equal to $1.95.
In step two, we can find the forward price
of the stock using the equation we learned in Professor Lucas's
first lecture.
Recall from Professor Lucas's lecture
that we can calculate the forward price of a stock
as F0 equals PS0 minus I times the exponential of r times t,
where F0 is the initial forward price,
P sub S0 is the current price of the stock and t
is the time to the maturity of the forward contract measured
in years.
Plugging in, PS0 equals $50, I equals $1.95,
and t equals 0.5 for six months.
We get that the forward price is F0
equals 50 minus 1.954 times e to the 0.08 times
0.5, which equals $50.01.
Finally, in step three, we can find
the initial value of the short position
in the forward contract.
This is not so hard, really.
As Professor Lucas discussed in lecture,
in the absence of arbitrage, all forward contracts
must have a net present value of 0 at inception.
Now, why is this the case?
Well, let P sub S0 will be the current price
of the stock that's underlying the forward contract.
The cash flows from a short forward position
are equivalent to those obtained by simultaneously lending
negative P sub S0 dollars today and shorting the stock at P sub
S0.
Clearly, the net cash flow today from this so-called Reverse
Cash-and-Carry strategy is 0.
So by the Law of One Price, the net present value
of the short position in the forward contract is also 0.

In Part B, it's three months later.
The price of the stock is now $48
and the risk-free rate is still 8% per annum.
What are the forward price and the value of the short position
in the forward contract now?
Well just like in Part A, we can go through our three steps.
Recall that in step one, we can use the given risk-free rate
to find the present value of the stock's expected dividends.
Since we originally expected to receive $1 dividends
in 2 and 5 months, now that it's three months later,
we can expect to receive a single dividend in two months.
The risk-free rate is still 8%, so the present value
of this dividend is I, which equals 1 times the exponential
of negative 0.08 times 2/12, which
is roughly equal to $0.98.
Now in step two, we can find the forward price
of the stock using the equation we learned in Professor Lucas's
first lecture.
Suppose F sub lowercase t is the forward price
for a contract negotiated at time lowercase t measured
in years, P sub S lowercase t is the stock price
at time lowercase t, and capital T
is the time to maturity of the contract also denominated
in years.
In this general form, our equation for the forward price
of a stock is now F sub lowercase t equals
P sub S lowercase t minus I times the exponential of r
times uppercase T. Plugging in P sub S lowercase t equals $48,
I equals roughly $0.98, and capital T equals 0.25,
we can find the forward price of the stock
three months later to be 48 minus 0.9868 times
the exponential of 0.8 times 3/12
for three months, which is equal to $47.96.
In our third and final step, we can
find the value of the short position
in the forward contract.
Now, we can't use the trick from the first part of the question
since we're no longer at the initiation of the contract
but from Professor Lucas's lecture, we
saw that the value of a short position
in any forward contract at time lowercase t
is given by lowercase f sub lowercase t,
which is equal to capital F0 minus capital F sub
t times the exponential of negative r
times the difference between capital T and lowercase t.
Thus, we can find the value of a short position
in the forward contract three months later by plugging
in capital F sub 0 equals $50.01,
capital F sub 0.25, which we just found in step 2,
equals $47.96, capital T equals 0.5
for a maturity of six months, and lowercase t equals 0.25
since we're three months into the contract, into the equation
above, which gives us an answer of $2.01.
