
PROFESSOR: We study discrete time stochastic processes
in order to develop models that help us make inferences
and predictions about data that's observed over time.
We look to the past to understand how data arose
and to try to figure out what the underlying mechanisms where
they produced it, and we look to the future
in applying models to make predictions and to take action.
So time series models are useful in a number of ways.
They can summarize data, provide useful descriptive statistics
such as measures of serial correlation,
they can be used for filtering, for detrending,
and more generally to differentiate
a noisy background from potentially meaningful signals
that might otherwise be obscured.
By quantifying the balance between signal and noise
in the context of a model, we can
have some guidance in identifying opportunities
and managing risk.
Most financial market data is noisy.
Can we determine whether two sets of data
describe similar market conditions?
Did they come from the same model?
Do they have the same underlying data generating process?
Did an old model break?
Has there been a new regime change?
If we need a new model, how do we know when it's needed?
How do we know what its connection
should be with the old one?
Time series models help us perform simulations,
make predictions, evaluate data adequacy,
quantify expected performance, and improve decision making.
Now we started with a bunch of stationary models,
and in this recitation we'll do a few exercises
and we'll talk about stationarity.
So stationarity means that we can shift the model in time.
It doesn't have a fixed origin.
That means when we write down things, definitions like these,
that if we shift the time index--
not that the data will be the same,
but that the probability distributions are the same
and that the defining equations are the same.
And you can see that for each of these,
for the generalized random walk model, for this moving average
model, and for our old friend the AR1 model.
In each of these cases if you were
to replace t by t plus k or t minus
l, the equation would take the same form.
Now stationarity in reality is much too strong a condition.
It would almost never hold.
First of all, it would require that the conditions
be the same forever.
And financial markets haven't been around forever,
and they might be around forever in the future,
but certainly not under identical conditions.
So what we really require for applying them--
we don't expect it to literally hold in practice,
but for the mathematics to be sensibly applied
we have a couple of things that we need to check.
One thing that we want to check is
this thing about long memory.
Do we need things infinitely far in the past?
So if we can find out and show in our models
that the initial conditions do not
have an infinitely long persistence over time,
that after some period of time at least
the behavior of the models doesn't depend
on the specific initial conditions,
or if it started a finite point in the past, then
at least we have a chance of applying these usefully.
Second, we don't want full stationarity.
We usually only require something
called weak stationarity, which uses
the first and second moments only.
So it says that the first moments, the means,
should be time invariant, and the second moments,
the variances and two point functions
like the autocovariance functions,
should depend only on the difference in time indices,
not on the exact location of a particular point in time.
And that's a good thing because usually
don't know what the higher moments are,
and we certainly don't know that everything is stationary.
So weaker conditions are good for us.
So keep in mind that the financial world does change.
We don't expect to find universal laws that will always
be applicable, we expect them to hold some period of time.
It might be a number of years, it
might be in a high frequency trading
context for a number of days, but there's
some persistence over which we can apply these models to help
understand signals and noise.
And if we're lucky, a model will be successful for a long time.
It'll have a good and stable run,
but eventually we want to be on the lookout for when
it will no longer be useful.
When it comes to an end it could be through a crash, a crisis,
a pandemic, or changes in behavior, changes
in institutions, changes in systems
of financial intermediation.
But for right now what we want to discuss
are some practical ways that we can
look at some examples of problems
with stationary time series using our tools of linearity
of expectation operators, and now we
add this additional feature that, for a stationary series,
we can shift them in time.
And that means that we can use translations or recursion,
and it can take a number of different forms.