
PROFESSOR: Exercise.
Let's let xt be defined as z cosine omega t plus z prime
times sine omega t, where omega is a constant--
and think of it as a frequency, let's let it not be a rational
multiple of pi--
and let's let z and z prime be independent,
normalized, random variables.
So show that xt is weakly stationary
or if you don't think it is, show that it's not.
So pause the video, take a few minutes,
and see if you can work it out.
And then we'll do it on the board together.

OK, let's take a look together.
So first of all, let's compute the mean and the variance.
So the mean is going to be 0 because z
and z prime each have mean 0.
So we can compute that e of xt is going to be cosine omega t--
which is just a scalar with respect
to our random variable--
times the expectation of z plus sine omega t expectation
of z prime.
And this is 0, and this is 0, because those have mean 0,
and therefore this is equal to 0.
OK, that part was easy.
How about the variance?
Well since the mean is 0, the variance of xt
is going to be the expectation of xt squared.
And again, what are we going to see? xt squared
is going to have that expression on the top, this expression.
We're going to have this term, squared, this term squared,
and a cross term of this with this.
The cross term is going to have vanishing expectation
because it will be an expectation of z and z prime,
and what we'll have is going to be--
just by doing it out, this is going
to be the expectation of z squared times cosine
squared omega t plus--

let's try this here--
plus expectation of z prime squared times sine
squared omega t plus the vanishing term, which
is going to be 2 cosine omega t sine omega t expectation of z
z prime.
In this last term vanishes, because that's
equal to 0 because z and z prime are statistically independent.
Now this term here is equal to 1,
this expectation is equal to 1, so we're
left with cosine omega t squared plus sine squared omega
t, which is just equal to 1.

Let's keep our colors consistent if we can.
And that's equal to 1.
Now let's look at the two point function,
or the autocovariance function.
So we will look at the expectation of xt
with xs where t and s are just two different arbitrary points
in time.
We could do t and t minus k, but let's write it
out this way for the moment.
OK?
So we just substitute in, and this is our basic trick
for most of these.
We just substitute in the defining equations,
we do out the algebra, we apply linearity,
and we compute the expectations in terms of our building
blocks, which usually we can reduce to basic z's.
So we'll be doing this trick again and again.
The one other trick that will be doing that you saw in lecture,
is will be using stationarity and recursion
to sometimes replace something with a t
by something with the t minus 1, or will take something
on the right hand side and use it to substitute
for the left hand side.
But here we're just going to do a straight calculation
for this problem.
So what's xt?
Well xt was given by the z cosine omega
t plus z prime sine omega t.
And x sub s is given by the same thing,
just with t replaced by s, z cosine omega s plus z
prime sine omega s.
And let's close all our brackets.

And now what are we going to have?
Well we're going to have the two z's will come together.
So we're going to have the expectation of z squared times
cosine omega t cosine omega s.

And if you can see where we're going with this,
I'll write this out just this one time
and then I'll start doing these a little faster.
We're going to have also expectation
of z prime squared times sine omega t sine omega s,
and then we have the cross terms,
which involve z multiplied by z prime and z prime multiplied
by z.
But we don't need to keep those, we
know that the expectation of z times z prime vanishes.
So what we're left with here then
is cosine omega t cosine omega s plus sine omega t sine omega s.
And if you recall from trigonometry,
that's the formula for the difference of angles.
So this is equal to cosine of omega times t minus s.
Now the exact form is not that important,
although it's kind of cute that this comes out.
The important thing is that it depends only
on the difference t minus s.
So stationarity is the property that if we shift t and s--
if we shift these two points by an equal amount,
that all the expectations of the probability
distributions, at least the first and second moments all
stay the same.
And here that's satisfied.
We see that the mean was 0, the variance
was 1 independent of time, and the two point function
which does depend on time, does so only
through differences between those two points.