
PROFESSOR: Exercise-- let's let xt be zt plus theta zt minus 2.
The z's are IID normalized random variables,
means 0 in variance 1.
And let's let A be the average of the first four
observations-- let's say x1, x2, x3, x4.
And you can generalize this, and you
should after you've done this.
But here, let's try this.
Using the results that we did in the previous exercise,
let's see what we can say about computing the mean
and the variance of A So pause the video now.
And A is an average.
It doesn't have a time index, but it's
based on a particular set, not an infinite sum
of random variables.
So A constitutes a new random variable.
What it its mean?
What is its variance?

Let's compute.
Plug in the formulas and take some expectations.
So first of all, it should be obvious that the expectation
of A is going to be 0, because it's the sum of a bunch of 0
mean variables, each of the x's.
What about the variance?
So we have the expectation of A squared.
This is the variance of A with the covariance
of A with itself.
Sorry, let me rewrite that.
Let's do it a little bit more neatly, as A. And then
let's just use our definition.
This is going to be 1/16 the expectation of x1 plus x2
plus x3 plus x4, quantity squared.
So what we're going to do, is we're going
to expand out the quadratic.

Take expectations, simplify terms,
and get our result. So what do we have here?
We're going to have two kinds of terms.
We're going to have terms in x1 squared plus x2 squared
plus x3 squared plus x4 squared.
Let's just write this out.
This is going to be 1/16 of--
now, we'll have the expectation of let's just
call it x1 squared plus 2 squared
plus 3 squared plus x4 squared.
But remember, these are independent
and identically distributed.
So that whatever the variance is,
they all have the same variance.
And actually, we know what that variances.
This is going to give us 4 times 1 plus theta squared,
because we just computed that.

Now, what about the cross term?
So the cross terms are going to be interesting.
So we're going to have 2x 1x2 plus 2x 2x3 and so on.
But the only ones that are going to have
non-vanishing expectation are going
to be x1, x3, and x2, x4, because they're
separated by two time indices.
That's the calculation that we just did a moment ago
in the previous exercise.
So we're going to have this plus-- let me write down
2 expectation of x1, x3 plus twice
the expectation of x2, x4.
And we'll close our big bracket over here.
And we know what those are.
This is going to be plus 2 theta,
plus 2 more theta over here.
So we have our final result--
the variance of A is going to be 1/4 of 1
plus theta plus theta squared.
Again, our principles were take the basic process,
expand out the things inside the expectation,
write things out algebraically.
Expectation of a sum is the sum of the expectations.
Reduce things down to z's or to previously known product
formulas.
And then, get the final numbers in terms of the parameters
of the problem.
And there we are.
I hope that answer matches yours.
