
INSTRUCTOR: This week, we introduced the fundamentals
of portfolio theory.
Our focus is on portfolio choice under mean variance
preferences.
We solved for optimal portfolio with and without the risk
free asset and characterized the main properties
of the optimal portfolios.
We also point out the limitations
of the mean variance framework and introduce
a more general formulation using the expected utility theory.
Portfolio choice is an example of decision
making under uncertainty.
Among all possible distributions of portfolio value
next period, we choose the one that
is optimal for a particular investor.
We rank the distributions of portfolio value
using expected utility.
As a result, the objective of portfolio choice
is to find the composition of the portfolio that
maximizes the expected utility of the investor.

An important special case of this problem
is the case of mean variance preferences.
This is the subject of what is called the modern portfolio
theory, and from now, we will assume that investors maximize
a mean variance objective.
The objective for the investor includes
the mean and the variance of portfolio return.
With these preferences, the investor
seeks to minimize portfolio risk for a given level of portfolio
expected return.
For a given level of portfolio risk,
investors maximize expected return.
We can visualize the investors objective
on the following graph.
The horizontal axis represents portfolio risk.
The vertical axis represents the expected return
on the portfolio.
The solid curves represent the combinations
of risk and expected return corresponding
to a given level of investor's objective.
An investor is indifferent among all the points on a given
curve.
These are the level curves.
Because the investor prefers low risk and high expected return,
the objective of the investor increases
as we move across the level curves
towards the upper left corner of the plot.
We can represent the portfolio choice problem
as the following problem.
Among all the portfolios with the target
level of expected return, find the one
with the lowest variance.
Formally, we need to solve the following optimization problem.
Minimize the variance of the portfolio return, which
is given by the sum across all pairs of assets,
of their return co-variance scaled
by the product of the corresponding portfolio
weights.
We impose two constraints.
First, portfolio weights must add up to one.
Second, the expected return on the portfolio,
which is a weighted average of individual asset
expected returns must equal the target level of portfolio
expected return.
As we discuss the portfolio choice problem,
we will use several examples, based on historical asset
returns.
In our examples, we use ETFs as risky assets.
Economically, each ETF on our list
represents an exposure to a distinct asset class.
Equities, high grade bonds, high yield bonds, gold,
and real estate.
All of these ETFs are US focused.
