
PROFESSOR: We start with the simplest case of portfolio
choice with two risky assets.
Recall that the expected return on the portfolio
is a weighted average of expected returns
on the portfolio assets.
The variance of portfolio return is a quadratic function
of portfolio weights and depends on the individual return
variances and the covariance of returns among the two assets.
As an example, consider two ETFs, SPY and AGG.
SPY is an Equity ETF represented in the S&P 500 index.
AGG represents the aggregate investment grade bond index.
In our analysis here, we use the sample moments of asset returns
as the true population moments.
With only two assets in the portfolio,
there is only one possible combination
of portfolio weights for each level of the expected
return on the portfolio.
In the following table, we summarize
the relation between the portfolio weights
and the moments of portfolio returns.
This table tells us what level of portfolio risk corresponds
to each given level of portfolio expected return.
Here we represent the set of portfolios of SPY and AGG
graphically.
The curve is in the space of standard deviation and expected
return.
This curve represents the trade off
between the expected return on the portfolio and the level
of portfolio risk.
Note that we did not consider negative portfolio weights.
The curve here represents long-only portfolios.
As a result, the two assets AGG and SPY are located at the two
ends of the portfolio set.
If we allow for short sales, portfolio weights
may be negative.
We extend our table to allow for negative weights
on each of the two assets.
We show the corresponding relation
between the expected return and portfolio
risk on the following graph.
Because we allow short sales, the two assets no longer
define the end points of the curve.
In fact, there are no end points.
The curve extends indefinitely, spanning all possible levels
of expected return.
The level of portfolio risk is bounded from below.
There is a single portfolio achieving
the lowest possible level of standard deviation.
This portfolio is known as the minimum variance portfolio.
Although the portfolio choice with two assets
is extremely simple, we can already
say something non-trivial about the optimal choice.
No mean variance investor would want
to hold the portfolio below the minimum variance portfolio.
The reason is that, for any portfolio on the bottom portion
of the curve, we can find another portfolio
on the top portion with the same level of risk
and a higher level of expected return.
We say that the bottom portion of the portfolio set
is inefficient.
Each of these portfolios is dominated by another feasible
portfolio and would not be chosen by any optimizing
investor.
Next we consider an important special case
where the second asset is risk free.
Then the standard deviation of the portfolio
is a linear function of the portfolio
weight of the first asset.
So is the portfolio's expected return.
As a result, the set of efficient portfolios
forms a straight line in the risk expected return space,
connecting the point on the vertical axis representing
the risk-free asset with the risky asset.
The lowest possible level of portfolio risk is zero.
It is achieved by the risk-free asset.
All portfolios with expected return
lower than the risk-free rate of return are inefficient.
And we show them here with a dashed line.

Although the case of two assets with one of them
risk-free appears to be extremely special,
we will see that this is an important part
of a general solution to the portfolio choice problem
with multiple risky assets.
