
PROFESSOR: Next, we consider portfolio choice
with multiple risky assets.
We allow for unlimited short sales.
Later, we will derive an explicit analytical solution
of this problem.
For now, let's consider a plot of the solution.
We are plotting the set of portfolios
with the lowest possible risk for any given
level of expected return.
These are called the mean variance optimal portfolios.
The curve representing the set of optimal portfolios
in the mean standard deviation space
is called the portfolio frontier.
The upper part of the portfolio frontier
is called the efficient frontier.
Investors with mean various preferences
should only consider investing in efficient portfolios.
Any other portfolio is dominated.
One can find another portfolio with the same level
of expected return and lower risk,
or in case of the inefficient portfolio on the portfolio
frontier, one can achieve the same level of risk
with a higher level of expected return.
The concept of the efficient portfolio frontier
greatly simplifies the portfolio choice problem.
We can reduce the set of all possible portfolios
to a much smaller subset, the efficient frontier,
without knowing the precise preferences of the investor.
We can then draw general conclusions
about optimal portfolios chosen by many different investors,
all mean various optimizers, but possibly
with very different attitudes towards risk.
Next, note that none of the five ETFs
end up on the portfolio frontier.
This is in contrast to the case of two risky assets.
With multiple assets, frontier portfolios
typically strictly dominate each of the individual assets.
Our next plot compares two portfolio frontiers.
The solid blue line shows the frontier constructed
using all five of our ETFs.
The dashed red line shows the frontier
constructed using a subset with three tiers, the AGG, SPY,
and IAU.
Note that the three asset frontier
is to the right from the five asset one.
That is intuitive.
One can always do at least as well with extra assets,
because the option of not investing
in them is one of the choices.
