
PROFESSOR: We now add a risk-free asset to the mix.
We still have multiple risky assets.
With the risk-free asset in the portfolio,
we can express each portfolio as a combination of two positions.
One is the risk-free asset.
And the other is a portfolio consisting only
of the risky assets.
As an example, consider a portfolio
with $40 invested in the risk-free asset and $60 split
evenly between the equity index and a long-term bond index.
This portfolio has 40% invested in the risk-free asset.
And the weights of equities and long-term bonds are 30% each.
We can alternatively view this portfolio
as a combination of two positions, 40% invested
in the risk-free asset and 60% invested in a portfolio of only
risky assets, which has 50% in equities
and 50% in long-term bonds.
More generally, consider a portfolio p with a fraction
x invested in a risky portfolio q
and fraction 1 minus x invested in the risk-free asset.
The expected return on portfolio p
is a weighted average of the risk-free rate of return
and the expected return on portfolio q
with the weights 1 minus x and x, respectively.
The return variance on portfolio p
equals the return variance of portfolio q times the square
of the weight on q.
Next consider the optimal portfolio choice
with the risk-free asset.
Prior to deriving the analytical solution to this problem,
we can gain some intuition from its graphical representation.
Start with the portfolio frontier
of risky assets, which is the red curve.
Select an arbitrary portfolio, either on the frontier,
represented by the blue circle, or strictly
to the right of the frontier, represented
by the green circle.
We combine each of these two portfolios
with the risk-free asset.
As a result, we are able to create any of the portfolios
on the blue and green dashed lines.
Know that all of these portfolios are inefficient.
They are dominated by the portfolios
on the solid black line, which combines a particular frontier
portfolio with the risk-free asset.
This frontier portfolio is the so-called tangency portfolio.
Its position on the portfolio frontier
is at a point where, if connected
to the risk-free asset, the resulting line
is tangent to the frontier.
The efficient frontier obtained by combining
the tangency portfolio with the risk-free asset
has the highest possible slope.
That is another way to define the tangency point.
It is clear that the resulting set of portfolios
dominates any other combination of the risk-free asset
with the portfolio on or to the right of the red curve, which
is the portfolio frontier of risky assets.
The black line is called the capital market line.
It represents the efficient frontier
in the presence of the risk-free asset.
The tangency portfolio plays a very important role
in our analysis.
In particular, as our discussion shows,
all mean variance investors should
hold the combination of the same portfolio
of risky assets, the tangency portfolio,
and the risk-free asset.
This is a striking result. All mean
variance investors optimally choose
to hold the same index of stocks.
We now introduce an important measure
of the risk return trade off of a portfolio called the Sharpe
ratio.
This ratio was introduced by William Sharpe,
one of the creators of the capital asset pricing model.
The Sharpe ratio is equal to the expected excess return
of the portfolio divided by its standard deviation.
If we think of standard deviation
as the quantitative measure of risk,
the Sharpe ratio tells us how much compensation
in the form of the risk premium a given portfolio
provides per unit of risk.
On our graph, the Sharpe ratio is the slope
of the line connecting a portfolio
with the risk-free asset.
The tangency portfolio has the highest Sharpe ratio
among all possible portfolios.
In other words, all mean variance investors
choose the risky portfolio with the highest Sharpe ratio.
All other portfolios on the capital market line,
which includes the tangency portfolio,
have the same Sharpe ratio.
