
PROFESSOR: We'll now solve for the optimal composition
of the tangency portfolio analytically.
We start with some notation.
There are n risky assets in the market.
We collect the expected returns into a vector, r-bar.
The vector of expected excess returns is x-bar.
We denote the covariance matrix of returns by sigma.
I is the vector of once.
And w is the vector of portfolio weights of the risky assets.
Note that because the vector of portfolio weights
includes only the risky assets, these weights
do not need to sum up to one.
Instead, we explicitly substitute out the weight
of the risk-free asset.
The weight of the risk-free asset in the portfolio
is equal to one minus the scalar product
of the vector of portfolio weights
with the vector of once.
We now state the mean variance portfolio choice problem.
The objective is to minimize the variance of the portfolio,
which is given by the covariance matrix of risky asset
returns multiplied on both sides by the vector of portfolio
weights.
We minimize portfolio variance, subject to the constraint
on the expected excess return.
The expected excess return on the portfolio
must be equal to the target m.
We solve this problem for an arbitrary level of the expected
return target.
We use the method of Lagrange multipliers to characterize
the optimal solution.
The Lagrangian is a quadratic function
of portfolio weights with the multiplier on the constraint
given by 2 times lambda.
We obtain the first order optimality conditions
by differentiating the Lagrangian with respect
to the vector of portfolio weights.
The first order conditions are sufficient to characterize
the optimal portfolio because the Lagrangian is a convex
function.
Recall that the covariance matrix of returns
is positive definite.
In vector form, the solution of the first order optimality
conditions states that the vector of portfolio weights
is proportional to the inverse of the covariance matrix
multiplied by the vector of expected excess returns.
The coefficient of proportionality,
lambda, depends on the level of the expected excess return
target, m.
For the tangency portfolio, the weights on risky assets
must add up to 1.
Recall that this portfolio does not
include the risk-free asset.
Imposing this constraint, we solve
for the proportionality coefficient lambda
and find the explicit expression for the tangency portfolio
weights.
To illustrate our general result,
consider the following example.
We are solving an asset allocation problem
among three assets--
the risk-free asset, T-bills, and two risky assets,
the stock market index and the hedge fund index.
We assume that returns on the stock market index, which
we abbreviate as SMI, and the hedge fund index, or HFI,
are uncorrelated.
We want to know what fraction of the tangency portfolio
should be invested in the hedge fund index.
We also want to compare the Sharpe ratios of the stock
market index and the hedge fund index on a standalone basis
to the Sharpe ratio of the tangency portfolio.
This would allow us to quantify the economic benefit
of combining these investments.
We are given the following data.
The risk-free rate is 3%.
The expected return on the stock market index is 9%.
And the standard deviation of the stock market index is 20%.
The hedge fund index has the expected return
of 5%, which is much lower than that for the stock market.
And the standard deviation is 10%,
which is also lower than the standard deviation of the stock
market.
We apply our general solution.
The weights in the tangency portfolio
are proportional to the inverse of the covariance matrix
of returns times the vector of expected excess returns.
Note that in this case because returns on the two risky assets
are uncorrelated with each other,
the covariance matrix of returns is diagonal.
And we can invert it by simply taking the inverse
of each diagonal element.
As a result, the ratio of the weights
on the stock market index versus the hedge fund index is 1.5 to 2.
We conclude that the tangency portfolio allocates
43% of its weight to the stock market
index and 57%, which is more than a half,
to the hedge fund index.
Does this mean that the hedge fund index
is a better investment than the stock market
index on the standalone basis?
The answer is negative.
Recall that the Sharpe ratio of an asset
is the ratio of its expected excess return
to its standard deviation.
The Sharpe ratio of the stock market index is 30%.
For the hedge fund index, it is lower, 20%.
Why is it that the hedge fund index has a lower Sharpe ratio
but receives such a high allocation
in the tangency portfolio?
Hedge fund index is a great diversifier to the stock market
portfolio because we assume that the two are uncorrelated.
This makes the hedge fund index an appealing investment,
even though its Sharpe ratio is relatively low.
Also, know that the magnitude of portfolio weights
is difficult to interpret.
The more intuitive quantity would
be the quantity of risk or variance
that each position contributes to the tangency portfolio.
The hedge fund index has a much lower standard deviation.
So despite of its higher weight, it contributes less than half
of the risk of the tangency portfolio.
This is consistent with the hedge fund index
being a less appealing investment with a lower Sharpe
ratio.
To conclude, we compute the Sharpe ratio
of the tangency portfolio.
It is the weighted average of expected excess returns
on the stock market index and the hedge fund index,
which are 6% and 2%, respectively,
using their weights in the tangency portfolio.
43% and 57% divided by the standard deviation
of the tangency portfolio.
We find the Sharpe ratio of the tangency portfolio to be 36%.
This is a sizable improvement over the stock market
index, which has the Sharpe ratio of 30%.
Although the hedge fund index earns
relatively low excess returns, because of its low volatility,
it has a Sharpe ratio close to that of the stock market index.
Combined with zero correlation between these two investments,
this allows us to diversify risk between the two investments
and raise the Sharpe ratio relative to each of them
individually.
As a thought experiment, if the hedge fund index
earns zero risk premium, then the tangency portfolio
would allocate 100% to the stock market index.
This highlights the fact that to raise the Sharpe
ratio be diversification, low correlation is not sufficient.
We need to be able to earn risk premia by taking
on uncorrelated risks.

We now introduce investor preferences
to the portfolio choice problem.
We've established that all mean variance investors choose
the same portfolio of risky assets, the tangency portfolio.
Individual risk aversion determines what fraction
of the portfolio an investor allocates to the safe asset
and what fraction goes to the risky assets,
the tangency portfolio.
The problem of finding the optimal portfolio
is, therefore, decoupled into two independent steps.
We first compute the tangency portfolio independently
of the investor's preferences.
Then we decide what fraction of the portfolio
to allocate to the tangency portfolio,
depending on the risk aversion of the investor.
Our two panels illustrate the solution of the problem.
The only difference between these panels
is investor's risk aversion.
The distribution of returns from financial assets
is exactly the same.
Take a look at the panel on the left.
We first compute the tangency portfolio
and construct the capital market line.
We then show the investor's level curves
in the space of expected return and standard deviation.
Recall that the level of the investor's objective
is the same along each level curve and increases
as we move towards the top left corner of the plot.

This investor wants to find the portfolio on the capital market
line that achieves the highest value of her objective.
This means that the optimal portfolio
is located at the point where the capital market line touches
the highest possible level curve.
The panel on the left represents an investor
with a relatively high risk aversion.
This investor combines the tangency portfolio
with the long position in the risk-free asset
to create the optimal portfolio.
The panel on the right shows indifference curves for a less
risk averse investor.
This investor forms the optimal portfolio in the same manner
as we just discussed, but because of the lower risk
aversion, the optimal portfolio includes a short position
in the safe asset.
This investor levers up the tangency portfolio
by borrowing.
The optimal portfolio then ends up on the capital market line
to the right of the tangency portfolio.
