
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we establish an important property
of the tangency portfolio.
It's an optimality condition, which
relates expected returns on all assets,
and their co-variances with the tangency portfolio.
First, we describe the contribution of each asset
to a portfolio.
Portfolio return is a weighted average
of individual asset returns.
If we let w denote the weights on the risky assets
and isolate the risk free asset in the expression,
we find that the return on the portfolio
is equal to the risk free rate of return
plus the weighted average of excess returns
on the risky assets.
Each asset contributes to the properties
of the portfolio in two ways.
It contributes to the portfolio expected return,
and it contributes to portfolio risk
measured by the standard deviation of portfolio return.
We consider these two dimensions separately.
The expected return on the portfolio
is the risk free rate plus the weighted average
of expected excess returns on individual assets.
We want to describe the marginal contribution of each asset
to the portfolio properties.
The term marginal contribution refers
to the change in portfolio properties
due to a very small incremental change
in the weight of an asset.
Mathematically, marginal contribution
is described by a partial derivative.
Holding everything else fixed, we
want to know how portfolio properties change
as we vary the weight of each asset slightly.
Taking a partial derivative of the portfolio expected return
with respect to the portfolio weight on asset I,
we find that the marginal contribution of risky asset
I to the expected return on the portfolio
is equal to its own risk premium.
Next, we consider how individual assets contribute
to portfolio variance.
The variance of portfolio return is given by a sum
across all pairs of assets of their covariance scaled
by the product of corresponding portfolio weights.
The marginal contribution of asset
I is the partial derivative of portfolio variance with respect
to the weight on asset I. As the following expression
shows, this partial derivative is
equal to twice the covariance of return
on asset I with the portfolio return.
This is an important result.
At the portfolio level, the relevant measure of risk
is not the individual variance of the asset,
but rather its contribution to the total portfolio variance.
On the margin, this contribution is
captured by the covariance of the asset with the portfolio
return.
Using the chain rule for differentiation,
we find that the marginal contribution
of an asset to the standard deviation of the portfolio
is equal to its covariance with the portfolio divided
by the portfolio standard deviation.
Next, we summarize the marginal contribution
of each asset of the portfolio by its marginal return
to risk ratio.
This is the ratio of the marginal contribution
of the asset to the expected return on the portfolio divided
by its marginal contribution to portfolio
risk or standard deviation.
Using our previous results, we find
that the marginal return to risk ratio
is the risk premium of the asset normalized
by the ratio of its covariance with the portfolio
to the portfolio standard deviation.
We now observe that optimality of the tangency portfolio
implies that for all assets, the marginal return
to risk ratio with respect to the tangency portfolio
is the same.
And in fact, this is equal to the Sharpe ratio
of the tangency portfolio.
We could derive this result by rearranging the expression
for the composition of the tangency portfolio.
It is more instructive to visualize the logic
behind this result graphically.
As we change the weight on the particular asset,
we are changing both the expected return
and the risk of the portfolio.
Let's perturb the weight of asset I
in the tangency portfolio.
The resulting change in the expected return and risk
will move the tangency portfolio on our plot
along the dashed red line.
The slope of the line by definition
is the marginal return to risk ratio of asset
I with respect to the tangency portfolio.
Note that in order for the tangency portfolio to be
optimal, the dashed line cannot cross the capital market line.
If it did, we would be able to improve the Sharpe
ratio of the tangency portfolio, which
is impossible due to its optimality.
Therefore, the dashed line must have the same slope
as the capital market line, which
is the Sharpe ratio of the tangency portfolio.
It is important to keep in mind that the result, we
just derived, is a mathematical identity.
It does not tell us anything about the properties
of expected returns of various assets.
This result is a statement about the tangency portfolio itself.
The composition of this portfolio
must be such that for all assets,
the marginal return to risk ratio
relative to the tangency portfolio is the same.
We now offer an equivalent characterization
of the tangency portfolio, which is very
useful in empirical analysis.
Consider a linear relation, a regression
of excess return of asset I on the excess return
on the tangency portfolio.
Keep in mind that we have here a relation
between random variables rather than a finite sample result.
In this linear relation, the slope of the beta
is equal to the covariance of asset I
and the tangency portfolio divided
by the variance of the tangency portfolio.
According to our optimality result,
the intercept in this regression or the alpha
must be equal to zero.
We can, therefore, test for mean variance
optimality of portfolios in the data using regression methods.
If we regress historical returns of an asset on the portfolio
return, we can test for portfolio optimality
by testing the null hypothesis that the intercept coefficient
in this regression is zero.
