
PROFESSOR: We'll now discuss some limitations
of the mean variance framework for portfolio choice
and consider some extensions.
One important limitation is that our formulation is static.
We construct the portfolio at time zero
and evaluate the outcome next period.
We do not rebalance the portfolio over time.
And we do not evaluate the time path of the portfolio value.
In practice, portfolio choice problems are often dynamic.
For example, consider a problem faced
by a household with multiple consumption objectives
over the life cycle.
This household would need to think
about intertemporal trade-offs and would
have to rebalance its investments multiple times.
To solve this problem, one would need
to learn how to construct dynamic plans.
This is one direction for extending our results.
The technical tools needed for this problem
come from dynamic programming, an area of optimization dealing
with multi-period decision problems.
Even in static problems, the objective of the investor
may not be fully described by the first two
moments of portfolio returns.
For example, suppose an investor wants
to maximize expected portfolio return subject to a penalty,
which is applied whenever the value of the portfolio
falls below a given threshold.
We can capture this and various other objectives
using the expected utility framework.
For our example in particular, one
may formulate a utility function to be equal to portfolio value
whenever this value is above the threshold
and, otherwise, linear with a slope higher
than one if the value of the portfolio
is below the threshold.
By construction, this objective penalizes outcomes
that fall below the threshold.
The strength of the penalty is controlled
by the parameter a, which describes
the difference in the slope of the utility curve
below and above the threshold.
We now consider the marginal contribution of an asset
to the expected utility objective.
And compare this to our results for the mean variance
objective.
Consider the expected utility.
We assume that the portfolio value starts at one.
And then the utility is defined over the end
of period portfolio value, which is
one plus the portfolio return.
The first order optimality condition
states that the derivative of the expected utility
with respect to each portfolio weight should be zero.
For asset I, this condition requires
that the expected value of the excess return on asset
I scaled by the marginal utility at the end of the period
is equal to zero.
We can rewrite this condition as the sum of two terms being
equal to zero.
The first term is a product of the risk premium on asset I
and the expected marginal utility of terminal portfolio
value.
The second term is the covariance
of the return on asset I with the marginal utility.
We observe that in this formulation
the marginal contribution of the asset to portfolio risk
is measured by the covariance of the return
and the marginal utility of portfolio value.
Because marginal utility is generally non-linear,
this measure emphasizes non-linear measures
of dependence between individual asset returns and portfolio
returns.
For example, the marginal contribution
of asset I to portfolio risk may now
depend on the covariance of its return
with the squared portfolio return called coskewness.
This stands in contrast to the mean varianace results,
where the marginal contribution of an asset to portfolio risk
was fully captured by a linear measure of dependence,
return covariance.
Another important implication of our analysis
here is that, under the expected utility objective,
different investors no longer hold the same risky portfolio.
The shape of the individual utility function
affects the optimal portfolio composition.