
PROFESSOR: In order to express things
in terms of known quantities, we used recursion relations
for the price and for the inventory remaining, which
are pretty simple.
So if I've got a Wt and a future point
I don't know that necessarily.
But I can express it certainly, in terms of Wt minus 1
and qt minus 1, which is the thing that I
wanted to vary and choose.
And similarly for the price, I can
express the relationship between p of t minus 1 and t minus 2
in this way, using the recursion relation for the price
evolution.
So if we substitute that into the results
from the previous slide, you get a whole bunch of algebra to do.
But when we combine the terms--
so what we're going to do is we're
going to substitute that in.
We're going to compute the expectation.
Computing the expectation, we're always
going to track where the random variables appear,
the only randomness that's going to appear
in the epsilons, which appear in the price coefficients
So we're going to look everywhere
where there's a price it appears with an uncertainty for what
the future price variation is.
That's going to contribute non-trivially
to the expectation.
Once we've computed the expectation,
there's no more randomness.
But there is dependence on the control variable,
in this case, q of t minus 1.
We minimize that.
And here, we can see that we're going to minimize this.
And this has a quadratic form plus some constant that's
leftover.
So the minimization term is going
to involve minimizing a quadratic form.
The reason it's quadratic does come
from our choice of a linear cost impact function
at the beginning.
So for more complicated functions,
the algebra in the derivatives get a little bit more
complicated.
But the general idea is what we see here.
So we want to minimize that quadratic function
and find our decision variable.
When we do that, the constant doesn't matter.
And what we find is our decision variable for our next
to last period, is that what we should do
is we should trade half the remaining shares.
So that's the solution.
That's an output.
That's not a guess.
So we've got that this should be half the remaining shares that
minimizes the function that we saw on the previous slide.
We take this result, and we plug it in to evaluate the function,
assuming that we've made that optimal choice.
And we get a new expression for the value function
in terms of state variables that are known at time t minus 1.
We know what the previous observed price was.
We know what the inventory was.
And now by substituting in our optimal solution for q hat,
we can express things this way.
And this is the value that we'll have
a time t minus 1 under the assumption
that we're going to follow an optimal policy
for the remaining two time periods.
So this is the desired closed form expression.
It depends only on the two things I've written here--
the price and on the inventory, which we know.
Well, let's keep going.
So there's going to be more algebra.
But it's going to be the same idea
until we get to the beginning.
We use one more step.
We do a substitution for our inventory.
We write out our expectation.
We do the expectation by identifying each occurrence
of the random variable.
We regroup terms so that we can group things in terms
of W times something with p.
So we group the W's together.
We group the p's together.
We minimize by varying the q's for the next time period.
We find that this also gives us a quadratic function.
The solution to this quadratic function
is going to be that the optimal trade at time t minus 2,
two periods before the terminal value,
is going to be 1/3 of the remaining inventory.
We keep going.
We substituted it in.
We get our new value function at this point.
Again, it's a function of p.
It's a function of W that are known.
And as a term that's linear in p,
terms that are linear and quadratic and W,
it's just the coefficients that change.
So as Bellman set out and as we hoped we would find,
the structure of the problem is the same in each period.
In each time period, we have to do the same thing--
compute an expectation, minimize,
and substitute variables.
And in each time period, we have a formula
that's got the same structural form as the one before.
So we know how to solve it each time.
It's just the details that change
a little bit in each period.
So we keep going.
And we find that at each time step,
we have the same solution.
We get a quadratic in every period.
And each time, we got some fraction
of the remaining shares that's going to decrease linearly
with the number of time steps that are remaining.
We take that value.
We substitute it in.
And for our arbitrary k, we find that we get this result.
It's something that's quadratic in W. It's linear and p.
The only thing that's changing is this k dependent coefficient
as we go.
We keep going all the way back to the beginning
to where k is the t minus 1.
And we're back in the initial period.
And for the initial period, we solve that.
We find that q hat in first period
is W1, which is our whole inventory divided by t.
In that's just Q/T. So what our solution has told us--
and here's our optimal value that we have here,
again is the same structural reform that we had before,
something that's linear in p.
It's quadratic in W1.
And therefore we found the first trade
size is 1/T for the total.
The second trade size is 1/(T-1) of the remainder.
So the optimal solution that we found
is we should divide up our trade quantity into equal slices.
And you might have guessed that as a starting point.
Why don't we start equal?
But here, we've shown that there's
a balancing between the uncertainty
that we have in the time periods and the market
impact that we have.
So the market impact that we have--
remember, if we trade too fast, we're
going to incur a high market impact that
then is going to affect the subsequent trades.
And we're looking for the balance between them.
In this particular case, with this special choice
of market impact function, we've gone
through these steps are the same steps you would do.
If you'd like, you can try it out,
going through with a more complex market impact function.
For example, a quadratic market impact
function instead of a linear.
The expected cost at the initial time--
therefore, we can go, and now we can substitute back in.
Because we know what the expected quantities
are going to be.
We know what the quantities traded
are going to be in each period.
We don't know what the prices will be.
But we do know what the market impact is.
So if we substitute that in, we find
that we're going to get the expected value of Q/T
times the sum of the prices.
This comes out because our trade quantities are actually
constant.
And then we can move the expectation inside
and look at the sum of the expected prices.
If we do that, we're going to get sum over little t
from 1 to big T.
We can do this sum explicitly.
It's just T(T+1)/2 .
And we got our final result, which
is that the term involves what we would have
had if there were no frictions.
If theta were equal to 0, we would have just
had the total quantity times the initial price
plus an expected part that's due to the transaction costs.
And this piece is quadratic in Q, in the total quantity,
not in the quantity done individual period.
So it's proportional to theta, which
is our market cost parameter.
And its quadratic in the number of shares.
So under this solution, the minimum cost solution
is to trade equal slices to divide up our trade.
If it's over 10 days, we do 1/10 per day.
But we find that the market impact,
relative to a frictionless trade,
relative to the mark to market value of a portfolio
is going to be quadratic in the number of shares.
Market to market is a standard way
of accounting for the value of an investment, where
we look at what the quantity is that we hold in an account.
And we multiply times the market price.
And that means the value on a market to market basis
assumes that it could be liquidated with no impact
costs.
And that's not a fair assumption for almost
any non-trivial investment.
So this tells us there's a significant deviation
between the actual expected liquidation cost
and/or acquisition cost in this case, where we're buying--
this it's q squared.
This would be the same if we're market to market or selling.
But the expected acquisition cost
is going to be a function that's quadratic in Q.
And that's going to differ from what the market to market cost
would be, which would simply be the first term this expression.
So we can compute with the expected transaction costs are.
It does depend on the number of time periods.
So if we were to spread this out over more time periods,
t, the longer we spread it out, the lower we
can make the transaction costs but even the limit
where we do it over an infinite number of time periods,
the total transaction cost is going to be finite.
And it is going to be proportional to Q squared.
If we compare with say, trading everything
in the initial period, we can see
that we would have incurred a higher transaction costs.
So if we doped all our shares in period one,
we would have ended up with a cost that would have also
been proportional to Q squared, but without the factor of 1/2.
So by this particular case, by slicing our trades
and spreading them out over time, we can lower the costs.
And we can lower them as much as by a factor of 2, but not more
than that.
So in both cases, we have market impact.
But by optimally executing our, trades
we can cut the transaction costs in half.
So to summarize what we've seen for the Bertsimas and Lo
solution for optimal trading, the cost of optimal execution
is half the cost of immediate execution.
The cost is quadratic in the total trade quantity.
If the quantity is small, then Q squared might be small.
But the impact is permanent.
So the idea is that each trade we do
leaves its mark on the subsequent trades.
And that's why these quantities build up
and why it's important to work from the end
back to the beginning.
There are a lot of things that we left out of this analysis.
So this model is quite specialized.
And you can generalize it to more realistic cases.
It doesn't account for things like a temporary market
impact that might go away.
That's often the case in markets where we're looking dynamically
over multiple time scales.
It doesn't penalize the opportunity costs of delay.
After all, if we're buying the shares,
maybe we're not just buying them for liquidity reasons.
Perhaps we're buying shares because we have a signal.
We know we have good forecast for the future price.
We think that the value is going to go up.
And the longer we wait, yeah, we might get a lower cost.
But we might lose out of the expected gain in the returns.
So perhaps we should include that in our trade
off as well, the opportunity cost of waiting.
We're not penalizing for risk, for volatility
in the final value.
And we're not really asking about
whether this particular trader or investor has
different preferences, different risk tolerances that
might favor faster or slower execution.
But it is an example of using dynamic programming
to get a recursive structure for the problem,
finding an optimal policy so that we know before we even
begin what our actions will be in the future,
subject to all of the conditions that we might find along
the way.
