
PROFESSOR: Techniques for finding optimal policies can
be broadly applied for finding optimal strategies
in a wide variety of settings.
The space of optimal trading strategies
looks at how we might devise trading in a world
where there's some uncertainty about the environment, where
there may be adversaries on the other side who are trying
to thwart our optimal methods, and where
we may try to define an optimal policy
subject to a number of things that are
unknown about the environment.
So what we'd like to do is come up with an optimal policy.
But these models are also helpful for exploring
how marketplaces work and how there's
an interplay between, possibly, different kinds of agents,
different kinds of actors who might have
different sets of preferences, different information sets,
and so on.
So we can use strategic models to take
a look at market structure to look
at even features of developing models for market
microstructure.
Where does liquidity come?
From where do bid offer spreads come from?
How do prices actually come to incorporate information?
When it comes to practical strategies for a trader
or portfolio manager, the starting point
is to think of what your objective is.
What is it you would like to optimize?
Do you want to minimize your costs?
Maybe if you're a trader acting as an agent for a client,
that should be your objective.
If you're trading on your own account,
you might have a concern where you
would like to minimize your costs,
but you also don't want to give up opportunity costs if you're
trading for a reason, and you might have a trading signal
that decay, for some reason.
Do you want to minimize your risk?
Do you want to maximize your utility?
What are the constraints that you're subject to?
So we need to think about what it is we want to extremize,
and then we want to define policy variables we have
under our control, state variables
that we need to monitor that would affect our decision,
and we need models for how the state variables would evolve
in time on their own, absent our participation, just
in the general environment and how they respond to the control
decisions that we make.
So one common way to approach this
is to look at minimizing the cost for a given level of risk
subject to, perhaps, the expected utility function that
reflects what our risk preferences are so
that it could be a general class that
might be different for different people
with different preferences.
So let's consider this case, where
we want to buy or sell a block of shares for little quantity q
and at time t.
Let's divide the total trade horizon into n sub-periods.
Let's allow it to be invisible, possibly without the t
going to 0.
But let's think of this as being finite because we typically
are trading in finite periods.
Trades are discrete.
The time periods don't need to be discrete.
But let's imagine that we're at least re-evaluating
the possibility of trading at regular intervals delta t.
We can always choose not to trade.
Trade quantity in a given period could be 0.
But the available trading times we'll denote by t sub k,
which are going to be at k delta t in clock time,
where k will go from 0 up through n.
Let's let q sub k be the amount that we hold at time k.
And we'll have boundary conditions
that-- let's say that we're selling a block of shares
this time.
And in this case, we're going to start with initial value big Q.
And we're going to decrement until we
get to a terminal value in our final period at-- of 0.
So the amount that we trade in a given period of time
is going to be delta qk.
It's just going to be the change in shares between one
period and the next.
And that's where we get to decide.
So part of our strategy, part of our policy,
part of our optimal solution and program
is going to be to determine sequence delta
k so that the shares add up to the total number q
that we sell over this period of time.
So a strategy, a solution, to this optimization problem
is find an algorithm that assigns values delta qk based
on, at each time stop, the information that's available
up to that point in time.
So what we need to do is devise a set of rules
you could hand off to someone.
You don't know what the future prices are.
You do have a model for what their stochastic evolution
might be.
But that way, someone could take your set of instructions.
At any point in time, they could say, aha,
I've got this many shares left.
Here's the price that I observe.
What should I do?
In the example of Bertsimas and Lo,
we saw that, actually, the optimal program
didn't depend on the prices.
It didn't-- it was the same thing no matter what.
It was just due to equal trading.
So that was a very stylized example.
More generally, it could depend on things
that evolve that are not yet known at the beginning,
and that's what we want to do when we devise a strategy.

So what price process might we use for trading?
We're going to look at a specific example.
It was developed by Almgren and Chris optimal trading policies.
So let's take a look at their assumptions.
And I encourage you to take a look at their original paper.
So for the drift rate, the--
during the price period, we're going
to think about this as a short-term trading
example, where the drift rate is going
to be taken to 0 as an initial approximation.
So we're not going to include the opportunity costs.
Those could be added later.
That might be a reasonable example.
It might not.
But we're going to do this to simplify the mathematics.
So one immediate specialization we're making
is to have no draft, just randomness.
And this is an obvious generalization
that you can make and redo the derivation to take a look at.
We're going to let the price process diffuse so
that there will be randomness.
And we're going to allow there to be market impact so
that our trading affects the final price.
So really, if we're setting up typical elements
of an optimization problem, we like
to get the realistic details.
But the minimum ingredients that we need
are two things that we want to minimize,
which are at odds with each other.
That's the basic feature we have.
So in this case, we're not minimizing the opportunity
cost.
We're leaving out that one leg.
But we do have two other legs that will give us
a non-trivial problem.
One of them is that we want to minimize risk.
The other is we want to minimize cost.
And those two are going to conflict with each other.
So we're going to assume that there is a speed of trading
that we could define.
Let's think of a variable delta q over delta t.
And we're going to assume that our market impact is a function
of the trading speed.
The more we trade in a given time period,
the higher the market impact.
We're also going to allow for a two-part market impact model.
We're going to think of there being permanent,
as well as temporary, market impact.
A permanent impact affects all future trades.
And a temporary impact affects the price
that you get in that period.
You might think of it as being due to order book structure,
due to the fact that you need to cross the bid offer spread
and go deeper in the order book than the initial price.
But it won't affect the next trading period
because liquidity might be replenished.
So there are two possible things.
Obviously, you can specialize, where you set
one or the other of these to 0.
But let's include a two-part model market impact.

So the market impact shows up in the pricing evolution
with a model that looks like this.
Let's assume that the price in one period
is given by the price in another period plus two components.
One of them is a random movement.
So zk is going to be a random variable.
Sigma is going to be the volatility associated
with the change in delta square root of delta t--
so what we'd expect for sigma square root of delta t--
to be the size of the shock that we would get
during a time period delta t.
And that's the diffusive part.
And we're going to assume that we have a permanent market
impact that's some function g.
And our assumption is it only depends on the rate of trading.
It doesn't necessarily depend on the number of shares
that we have in inventory because that's not
known by the market.
The amount that we push into the market in a given time period
will be seen by the market.
Those are the shares that we expose.
And those might realistically be modeled
as affecting future periods.
And the impact that we have is going
to be some function that depends on the rate at which we're
trading times the size of the time period
if we have the same rate over a longer time interval.
We're going to have a larger market impact.
And we'll also include that there
might be a temporary market impact that just affects
the price during a particular period that affects
our execution costs for one set of trades,
but not for the subsequent time periods.
So we have g represents a function of arbitrary form.
We'll pick some examples so we can solve this later on.
But g represents permanent market impact.
h represents temporary market impact
that we might have for the short term.
So we like to look at the total trading cost.
And obviously, we'd like to minimize
what we lose relative to a frictionless set of trading.
So in the case where we're selling,
we'd like to maximize the cost.
And we can think of what's sometimes
called the implementation shortfall as being
the difference between a frictionless trade
and the real-world frictions where we're always
going to lose something.
So what do we have?
Well, we've got our frictionless price is quantity
times the initial price.
That's what we'd have if there were no impact at all.
We could implement everything all at once.
And we're going to have subtracted
from that what the actual impact is
of the price changes over the trades that we actually do.
So if we break this into parts, we
have one piece that comes from the diffusivity terms
from all of our trades and we have
another part that comes from the permanent market impact term.
And we're summing this over all periods,
with delta q being the quantity that we
do in each period times the impact time in each period
and the piece that's left over that is non-transient
that affects only the parts that are done within each period.
So this part here, this final term
that's the temporary increase is multiplied by delta q.
It's only the change that we have.
This part here depends on q, the decreasing balance
for the number of shares, even though this term here depends
only on the trading velocity.
But we've taken something that-- where
we have initial variables big Q and P0,
initially known price and quantity.
We have unknowns, which are the q's and delta q's.
And we need to determine-- find the optimal policy.
And we've substituted p tilde k, which
is the price we receive in each period.
And we've expressed it in terms of these other variables, some
of which are unknown, including this random variable, z sub
k, others of which are functions of the yet to be determined
policy.
So this is g of delta q and h of delta q.
So this is the expression that we'd like to optimize.
So implementation shortfall we can think about
as something that we measure after we're
done with our program--
that if we're selling a bunch of shares,
our effective final price is less than p0--
and we hope to receive.
So the final price could actually be less
or could be greater due to the randomness of the diffusion.
We're not taking that into account here.
So let's assume that all the trades are executed.
So it's not always the case in markets
that, when you send in a quantity--
when you observe a price, you send in the quantity
that you want.
Depending on whether you do market orders or limit orders,
you're necessarily going to get the quantity
you want at the price you thought you were going to get.
But let's assume that all the trades are filled regardless
of the price movement.
Let's not consider unfulfilled orders.
And let's note that before we start trading,
the realized effective price is a random variable.
So we're going to need to take expectations,
and we want to optimize the expectations.
So we're going to optimize either the expected cost
or the variance or both or maybe some linear combination.
So what do we have?
Well, let's look at what the expected cost and variance are.
The expected cost-- I take the expectation of the previous
result. I have the expectation of my random variable
in the z's.
It's going to drop out because it
was arithmetic Brownian motion and 0 mean,
and we didn't have a drift term.
So the expected cost that we have has these two terms, which
are written in terms of my function
h and j in terms of the permanent and temporary market
impact.
And the algebraic structure is a little bit different.
We're going to massage those so they have a common form.
This has a qk because this depends on the total amount,
and this depends on the incremental amount.
And then if we compute the variance,
the variance does depend on the diffusive term.
This expected cost term is independent of sigma
because the fluctuations were equally likely to help us out
as to hurt us.
But the variance absolutely depends on sigma.
That will only hurt us.
So this depends on sigma squared.
And it's a positive quantity.
It depends on the sum of the q squareds.

To look at a concrete example, let's make some assumptions
for the market impact functions.
If we take the permanent impact function
g to be of linear form--
so it's something proportional to the trading speed.
Let's call it gamma times v, where v is the trading speed
delta q over delta t.
We'll find that the final permanent change depends
on the total amount that we have, q.
And what's going on is that when we have this kind of market
impact function, the early trades
are going to push down the price on the later trades.
So it's permanent.
The more we trade early, the more it hurts us later on.
If we trade more slowly at the beginning,
there's less impact on the later trades,
but there will be greater variance.
So we're going to need to find an optimal balance
between those two features.
So there's a bunch of algebra where
the contribution from the expected shortfall that
comes from the permanent impact function--
and with this identity above me, we can simplify some of that.
I can rewrite this sum of the delta q's
by writing it this way.
I can expand it out, expand out this square,
regroup some of the terms, and I can pull out
an overall factor of the-- from-- this is
the sum of squared differences.
I can get the total value of q, quantity
squared, by completing the square minus another term here
that just depends on the differences
and shows up here in the second term,
where I have q times the differences.
And then I can re-express this term
in terms of q, which is a constant and something which
is quadratic in the trading velocity.

What about h?
Well, let's let that be linear as well.
And the choice chosen by Almgren and Chris
is one we can stick with.
Let's let there be something that depends on-- maybe
on the absolute value.
So we'll let it depend on the sign.
We're going to-- not going to assume that we ever
get helped out by trades.
So there's never any positive benefit to trading.
If you're a market maker and you are providing liquidity
to the markets, then you can make money on your trades.
We're going to assume that that's not the case here.
So remember that h is going to be multiplied times the trade
that we do in a given size.
So that's why the constant term--
we want to make sure it's going to have the appropriate sign.
So it's-- we are going to lose money regardless of whether
we're buying or selling.
That's why we have the sign function there.
And the other term is linear.
And it's going to multiply a delta q.
So we have that down here, when we
substitute in that linear expression in the top.
This is just an assumption.
Eta and c1 are constant coefficients.
And when we substitute that general form,
we're going to get something in expression,
which is the contribution to the expected cost--
is something that depends on the absolute value
of the number of shares that we trade
and something that's quadratic.
So if we combine those terms from the h and the g,
from the temporary and the permanent,
we find that our expected cost is
going to have term that's going to be constant
plus a term that's linear with an absolute value
plus a term that's quadratic.
If all the terms have the same sign,
then we can drop the absolute value.
That's assuming, as in the little grid example
we had, that we're not changing directions--
that if we want to sell shares, our strategy is not to buy some
back and then resell them.
That might be possible.
You could imagine a scenario with asymmetric market impact
where, if you go in the opposite direction,
you fake out the market, induce a price change that's
in your favor, and then you turn around on the other side.
We're going to assume that the markets don't respond that way
and you are not trying to manipulate them in such a way.
So we'll remove the absolute value.
And then we'll have a term which is--
which now simplifies.
If all of the delta q's have the same value,
then we can sum them up.
We get big Q. So we have a constant term in front.
We've got some parameter here whose sign
is going to depend on the chosen parameters in the problem.
And we've got something which is quadratic in delta q.