
PROFESSOR: So we take a look at the minimum cost solution.
And we find in this case, that we
do get a solution for dividing things
into equal cost for the moment.
But hang on, we'll generalize this in a bit.
So for that very special set where all we want to do
is to minimize the expected cost,
we do have a solution where the trade we with each size
is 1 Nth of the total fraction.
So this is a linear trajectory that minimizes the squares that
we had, that sum of delta Q's.
And we can substitute it in.
We get an expression for what the expected cost is
under this program that minimizes the total cost.
The variance of this though, can be very big.
So given our program for equal size,
we get a very large variance.
And again, this variance is going
to persist even in the limit where N goes to infinity
and we have a large number of trading periods.
As N goes to infinity, we've got a finite cost,
which now is linear in Q. And we have a variance,
which is quadratic in Q. Excuse me,
the expected cost is determined it's linear and quadratic in Q
, and a finite variance, even as we spread our trades out
infinitely far.
Suppose we wanted a minimum variance strategy.
Well, we'd dump all our shares at once.
We'd incur an immediate cost.
And here, our variances 0.
Our market impact is going to be very big. .
And our associated cost is very large.
Suppose we like an optimal strategy
that balances those two.
Suppose we'd like to include some compensation
and multi-function so that a risk-averse trader is not just
going to be indifferent to the trading speed.
So let's make it so that it's advantageous to not
delay an infinitely long amount of time.
Let's assume that it's not good to allow fluctuations,
even if they're equally likely to be positive or negative.
And what we'd like to do is we'd like to have a lower cost,
but we don't want to let the variance be arbitrarily large.
So one way we could do that is we
could introduce utility function of this form.
It could be the expected cost plus some function,
some constant lambda, times the variance.
So we get two special cases--
the minimum impact response to letting lambda equals 0.
We want the lowest cost.
We don't care about the variance.
Or we have the minimum variance by letting
lambda go to infinity, and we don't
care about what the cost is.
So for intermediate values of lambda,
we're going to have a one-parameter family
of optimal trading strategies.
And those are going to form an efficient trading frontier.

We can solve this in closed form in, the case, linear functions,
for g and h.
Let's take a look at the form that those have.
Our function, U, our utility function
that we're going to extremize, is
going to have the form of some constant times delta Q squared
plus some other constant involving
the constants of the problem, and proportional to lambda
times Q squared.
So we're going to take a minimum with respect to Q
and set it equal to 0.
And we have this set of difference equations
that comes about from the fact that we've
got these delta Q's here in addition to the q's over here.
So this is of the form of a second difference equation.
This is a discrete equation, but it's
a discrete analog to something that looks like a second order
differential equation.
So we've got this general form.
We'd like to find a functional form
that solves this recursive equation
and that satisfies these boundary conditions.
Well, I'll tell you what it is, and you can substitute it in.
You can solve for this by taking a look at guesses
of particular forms or by looking
at the similar kind of cases that we have
for differential equations.
But you can check the solution here,
which is a linear combination of positive and negative
exponentials satisfies this second order difference
equation.
And it satisfies the boundary conditions.
So when t goes to 0, this is 0.
When t goes to big T, this satisfies the condition
that we have our property boundary condition.
So because we're selling, when i is equal to 0,
we've got N minus i is equal to N
and delta t is equal to big T, the numerator and denominator
are equal and we get Q.
And we get to our terminal value,
i increases linearly here.
But it's not a linear function.
It's inside this parabolic sine.
But when we do approach not continuously,
but we approach gradually, the terminal value,
where the final trading value at the end, quantity
that we have left at the final value
is going to be 0, where i is equal to N and then
the numerator is equal to 0.
I've redefined the parameters because we
had this eta hat that from one of our trading functions
and lambda, which is our preference parameter.
And I've wrapped those all up into a single new parameter
called kappa.
It's defined by this equation.
So kappa is defined through this equation,
but you can see it's just a constant here.
And qualitatively, we can ask what
this trajectory looks like.
So is it a set of linear slices?
Do we just end up dividing our trades equally?
The answer is no.
We end up with something that looks a little bit differently.
The trajectories are defined for each period in each lambda.
And depending on whether we have positive or negative risk
aversion, in this case, depending on the values
that we have for lambda, if we have positive risk aversion,
then we'll find this lower curve,
something that looks like this.
That cinch function tells us that
instead of a risk-neutral idea, where
we would have equal trading strategies,
we want to start out big and then gradually decrease
our trade size.
So it turns out that there's a particular shape to this curve.
It does satisfy this endpoint.
So we end up with 0 at this point in time.
And the speed of trading depends on the amount of risk aversion
that's in the value of lambda.
So for a given set of parameters and a given
set of risk preferences, we solve an optimization problem.
It gives us how we should trade over time in order
to balance the market impact that lowers
or that it increases our cost of trading.
And the balance is not against the risk, the uncertainty
of doing things for a longer period of time
if we were to stretch things out to try
to minimize our market impact.
Finally, because this is a one-parameter family of curves,
we can take a look at this.
Almgren and Chriss plotted this is an efficient frontier
for trading.
But we can say as a function of our parameter lambda,
where do we want to be?
The naive strategy at B, the equal slicing strategy,
has the lowest total cost.
But the efficient frontier is this one-parameter family
of strategies where there's an optimal strategy
for each value of lambda that you might choose to consider.
