
PROFESSOR: In this question, we will review binomial option
pricing model.
Suppose that there is a stock with a current share
price of $100.
The graph on the slide shows the evolution of the share
price over the next two years.
It can become either $125 or $75 a year from now.
If it was $125, it can grow to $150 in year two
or can go down to $60.
If it was $75, it can grow to $125, or it can go down to $20.
Now suppose that the risk-free rate is 3.5%.
We will assume that this is an effective annual rate.
We will also assume that there is no arbitrage
and that investors can borrow and lend
at this risk-free rate of 3.5%.
We are asked to compute the current price
of a European call option that expires two years from now
and has a strike price of $120 per share.
Let's start by creating a tree that
shows the payoffs from this option at the end of year two.
If the share price is $150 and since this is a call option
and has a strike price of $120, our payoff,
as the holder of this option, would be $30.
In the up-down state, when the share price is $60,
this option expires out of the money.
And, therefore, our payoff is $0.
In the down-up state, the share price is $125,
and, therefore, our payoff is $5.
And, in the down-down state, the share price is $20.
Therefore, again, this option expires out of the money.
And, therefore, our payoff is $0.
Let's start by pricing the option
in year one in the up state.
We will create the replicating portfolio
that has a shares of the stock and b dollars
of the riskless bond that replicates the payoff
from this option in year two.
So, therefore, we have the following two equations--
150, which is the price of a share in the up-up state,
times the number of shares, a, plus 1
plus the risk-free rate of 3.5%, which gives us 1.035,
multiplied by b dollars that we originally
invested in the riskless bond.
That should be equal to $30, which is our option
payoff in the up-up state.
The second equation equates the payoff
from the replicating portfolio and the payoff
from the option in the up-down state.
In the up-down state, the share price is $60,
and we have a units of the share.
Therefore, our total payoff is 60 times a plus, again,
1 plus the risk-free rate of 3.5% times
b, which is the initial amount of dollars
that we invested in the riskless bond.
And that should equal to 0 because 0 is the payoff
that we get from the option in the up-down state.
Solving this system gives us the following values for a and b.
Notice that the value of a is positive, and the value of b
is negative.
This means that, to replicate the option, we
need to buy one third of a share and borrow
$19.32 at the risk-free rate.
The value of this call option in year one in the up state
would equal to the value of this replicating portfolio.
Recall that the share price in this up state is $125.
Therefore, the total value of this replicating portfolio
is $22.34.
Next, we follow exactly the same steps
to find the price of the option in the down state in year one.
The following system of equations
gives us the replicating portfolio of a shares
and b dollars of riskless bond.
Solving this system of equations gives us the following values.
And, therefore, the option price in the down state is $2.65.
The final step is to price this option in year zero.
This tree shows you the prices of this option
in the up state in year one and the down state in year one
as well.
Again, we're constructing a replicating portfolio
that consists of a shares of the stock
and b dollars of the riskless bond that
replicates the payoffs of this option in year one.
Solving this system for a and b, we can price this option
and find that its price in year zero is $13.41.
This tree summarizes the evolution of this option price.
Its current price is $13.41.
If the share price goes up, the option price
increases to $22.34.
If the share price goes up again,
this option expires in the money and pays off $30.
If the share price goes down, this option
expires out of the money and pays off $0.
If the share price in year one goes down,
the option price goes down to $2.65.
And, if the share price goes up, this option
expires in the money and pays off $5.
And, if the share price goes down,
this option expires out of the money and pays off $0.