
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will demonstrate
that, if the put-call parity for European options does not hold,
this will create arbitrage opportunities in the market.
Suppose that you observe the following prices
of financial instruments in the market.
There is a stock, XYZ, that currently
trades at $20 a share.
There is a European put option on XYZ with one-year maturity
and a strike price of $18, and it sells for $3.33.
There is also a European call option on the same stock, XYZ.
It also has a maturity of one year and a strike price of $18.
And it sells for $7.
Suppose that the continuously compounded risk-free rate
is 8%.
The question asks if there is an arbitrage
opportunity in this market.
If there is, it asks to describe a trading strategy designed
to profit from this opportunity.
Let's examine whether the put-call parity holds.
The price of the call option plus the present value
of strike K equals to $23.62.
Recall that 8% is continuously compounded.
Therefore, to compute the present value of $18,
we're multiplying it by exponent raised
to the power of negative 8%.
Capital T here equals to 1 because both of these options
mature in one year.
Second, the price of the put plus the price of the stock
equals to $23.33.
We can see that the put-call parity does not
hold because the price of the call plus the present value
of K is greater than the price of the put
plus the price of the stock.
What can we do to exploit this mispricing?
As always, when it comes to arbitrage,
we should buy what is cheap and sell what is expensive.
Therefore, we should buy the put at $3.33.
We should buy the stock at $20.
We should sell the call at $7, and we
should borrow the amount highlighted here in red--
this is just the present value of $18--
at the risk-free rate, 8%.
Therefore, a year from now, we need to pay back $18.
These transactions generate the immediate profit of $0.29.
Now let's see what happens a year from now.
Suppose that the share price one year from now is above $18.
We will denote this share price by S cap
T. This means that call expires in the money,
and put expires out of the money.
Therefore, you need to deliver S cap T minus 18
to the counterparty to whom you sold the call,
and you also need to repay the loan of $18.
To do this, you will do the following.
You will first sell this share at S cap T. Second,
you will pay S cap T minus 18 to the holder of the call option.
And, third, you will repay the loan of $18.
You can see that, regardless of the value of S_T,
you have just enough to pay to the holder of the option
and to repay the loan.
Therefore, your position a year from now is covered.
Now let's see what happens a year from now if the share
price ends up being below $18.
This means that the put expires in the money,
and the call expires out of the money,
and it doesn't get exercised, which
means that your only obligation a year from now
is to repay the loan of $18.
To do this, you will do the following.
First, you will sell the share and get S cap T. Second,
you will exercise the put option and collect 18 minus cap S_T.
You can see that the total proceeds
from the sale of the share and from exercise of the put option
equal exactly $18, regardless of what the future share price is.
And this gives you exactly enough
to repay your $18 loan, which means
that your position a year from now is covered.
To summarize, we have demonstrated
that if the put-call parity does not hold,
this creates an arbitrage opportunity
with immediate profits and no future risks.