
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will use a binomial tree
to price a European put option.
This put option is similar to the call option
that we priced in the previous video.
It has the same strike price of $120,
and it expires two years from now.
First, let's draw a tree that captures the payoffs
from this put option.
Recall that in the up-up state, the share price is $150.
Therefore, this put option expires out of the money,
and pay off from this option is $0.
In the up-down state and when the share price is $60,
this put option expires in the money,
and therefore, our payoff is $60.
In the down-up state, the share price is $125.
Therefore, this put option expires out of the money.
And in the down-down state, the share price is $20.
The strike price of this put option is $120.
Therefore, our pay off is $100.
Let's first find prices of this put option
in the up and down states in year one,
which we'll denote as Pu and Pd, respectively.
And then we will find the price of this put option today,
which we'll denote as P0.
We will use the same portfolio replication approach
as we used to price the call option.
In year 1, in the up state, replicating portfolio approach
gives us the following two equations.
Solving these two equations, we obtain
the value of a as negative 0.667 and the value
of b, positive $96.62.
Let me highlight an important result here.
Notice that the value of a is negative and the value of b
is positive.
Recall that when we were pricing a call option, the value of a
was always positive, and the value of b was negative.
What does this mean economically?
It means that to replicate a put option,
we need to short 0.667 units of the underlying stock,
and we need to lend $96.62 at the risk-free rate.
In contrast, to replicate a call option,
we had to buy the underlying stock
and borrow at the risk-free rate.
The price of the put option must equal
to the value of the replicating portfolio in the year 1
in the up state, which equals to $13.29.
Repeating these steps, we can obtain the price
of the put option in year 1 in the down state,
which equals to $43.59.
Having priced this put option in the up and down states
in the year 1, we can finally turn to pricing
this option in year 0.
We obtain the following system of equations
from our replicating portfolio approach, and solving it,
we obtain the following values for a and b.
Putting this all together, we get the following price
of the put option in the year 0, which equals to $25.43.
Let's summarize by drawing a tree that captures the price
evolution of this put option.
Its current price is $25.43.
Next year, if the share price goes up,
the price of this put option drops to $13.29.
Then, if the share price goes up again,
this put expires out of the money and pays off $0.
If the share price goes down, this put expires in the money
and pays off $60.
If, on the other hand, the first year the share price goes down,
the price of this put option increases to $43.59.
If, after that, the share price goes up,
this option expires out of the money and pays off $0.
If, on the other hand, the share price goes down again,
this put expires in the money and pays off $100.
Some of you might have thought of an alternative
and much faster approach to solving this problem.
We have already priced the call option.
And therefore, we can use the put-call parity
to price this put option.
Notice that, since we're given the effective annual rate
and not the continuously compounded APR,
I'm writing down the put-call parity in the following form
where the present value of strike K at the risk-free rate
is just K divided by 1 plus r raised to of power of T.
So let's use this equation to find the put price.
It will equal to 120, which is the strike price divided
by 1 plus 3.5%, which is the risk-free rate raised
to power of 2 because our option expires two years from now.
The price of the corresponding call option
is 13.41, which we found using the binomial tree
approach, minus $100, which is the current share price.
This gives us the price of this put option of $25.43, which
equals exactly what we obtained using the binomial tree pricing
approach.
Overall, the put-call parity demonstrates
that the prices of the call and the put options that we
obtained using the binomial pricing approach
are consistent.