
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
learn how prices of options written on a firm's stock
are, in theory, related to the values of corporate securities
such as equity and debt.
ABC Corporation is an educational technology startup,
which has 500,000 shares outstanding.
Next year, the value of ABC's assets
can either be $25 million or $5 million,
depending on the market adoption of early childhood development
applications.
ABC has a $20 million face value bank
loan due in one year from now.
There are two options on ABC stock currently traded
in the market.
A call option with one-year maturity and $7 strike price is
traded at $1.50 per option.
A put option with one-year maturity
and also a $7 strike price is traded at $2.52 per option.
Suppose the current one-year, risk-free rate is 0%.
We will use information given to us
to find the current market values of ABC's equity
and debt.
Let's start solving this question
by figuring out what would be the value of assets, debt,
and equity of this firm in year one,
as well as what would be the share
price of this firm in year one.
This table shows you that there are two states.
Next year, it can be bad state or can be good state.
In the bad state, recall that the assets of the firm
will be worth $5 million, and, in the good state,
they are worth $25 million.
What would be the value of debt in year one?
Recall that the face value of this loan is $20 million.
In the good state, the firm's assets are worth $25 million.
And, therefore, the firm has enough to repay this debt.
In the bad state, however, the value of assets
is not sufficient to pay this debt in full.
And, therefore, the firm has to default on its debt obligation.
Therefore, the value of debt in this bad state of the world
is only $5 million, which equals to the value of assets
of the firm.
The value of equity will be whatever is
left after we repay the loan.
In the good state, it is $5 million.
In the bad state, it is $0 because we
defaulted on our loan.
Finally, we can compute the share price
by dividing the value of equity by the total number of shares
outstanding.
In the bad state, the share price will be $0.
In the good state, it will be $5 million
divided by 500,000 shares outstanding,
which gives us $10 a share.
Now we know what share price will be in year one.
But what is the current share price?
Let's use current option prices to impute the current share
price.
Let's compare the values of one share
and one call option in year one.
Recall that the call option has $7 strike price.
Therefore, in the bad state, when the share price is $0,
the payoff and, hence, the value of the call option will be $0.
In the good state, however, the value of the call option
will be $3.
Based on this table, we can arrive to the key insight.
Since this share always pays 10/3 times more
compared to the call option, the price of the share today
should be 10/3 times higher than the price of the call option
today.
Recall that the price of the call option is $1.50.
So, therefore, the share price is
10 divided by 3 times 1.5, which gives us $5 a share.
Now we can compute the total market
value of equity of this firm.
Since this firm has 500,000 shares outstanding,
the total market value of equity would
be $5, which is the share price, times the number of shares,
which gives us $2.5 million.
