
PROFESSOR: We're given the following payoff function
as the function of s, which is the stock price.
So these are the different payoffs,
depending on the realization of the stock price,
S. So this question asks us to draw the payoff diagram
and to represent this payoff as a portfolio of European put
and call options.
Now let's first draw this diagram and see how many
and of what kind of options we need to construct this payoff.
I'm going to start on the right-hand side here,
and we'll put 40 as the stock price here.
And the reason I'm starting there
because this payoff at the bottom here looks familiar.
So it's 2s minus 80.
So you can think of it as just simply two call options
with a strike price of 40 because each call option
with the strike price of 40 would give you
a payoff of s minus 40.
So two of them is going to be 2s minus 80.
So this is the function right here, so 2s minus 80,
and this is my first starting point.
So I need two calls with a strike price of $40 each.
Then it gets flat line or zero payoff between 30 and 40.
And, between 20 and 30, it gets 90 minus 3s.
So, first of all, since I have minus 3s,
it means that I need three options and three put options
because this is a negative slope.
So, if I get three put options with the strike price of 30,
the payoff from this is going to be 90 minus 3s because again--
so, if I get one put option with a strike price of 30,
the payoff from that option will be 30 minus s.
So 3 times that would be 90 minus 3s.
So, therefore, this is the function that I will get here.
So I need three puts with the strike price of 30.
Now, next, notice that, this breakpoint of $20, the slope
becomes less steep.
So we get from negative 3s to negative 2s.
So what it effectively means is that here, when we reach 20,
we need to short or sell one put option so that our slope goes
from 3s to 2s.
So I'll say that we are buying, or we are long this first set
of options so far.
At this point, we are short one put with a strike price of $20.
So this gives us a little bit steeper slope right here.
So here we have the slope of 3.
Here we have the slope of 2, so two options, three options.
And here the slope will be 2.
Now, finally, when we reach 10 right here,
so this break point, the slope goes from negative 2
to negative 6.
So it means that we need to long another four
options with the strike price of 10, so long four puts
with the strike price of 10.
And so this is going to make this line very, very steep.
And so the slope of this line is 6.
Now what we need to verify is that this line actually
intersects the y-axis at 110 because you
can see that, when s equals to 0, this has to be equal to 110.
So what I will do next is that I will
take the portfolio of these options
that we constructed right now and taken
to construct this graph, and I will write the payoff
for each of them.
And I will add them all up just to make sure
that we get 110 as the intersection point
and, therefore, the correct representation,
the correct graph, that represents this payoff
function.