
PROFESSOR: Let's talk more about ito processes and Ito's lemma.
So we know that an ito process is a stochastic process that
can be described in differential form
by an expression of the type dx is adt plus bdB.
And we think of this as something
that tells us what happens between a time interval dt.
That's why we think of the dt part as being deterministic.
The coefficient functions a and b
are evaluated at the starting point,
or evaluated at a time, t, for value x.
And that we assume is known.
What we want to know is what happens
during the next interval dt.
What's the new increment to x, dx that gets added on?
So in that sense, the a and b are coefficient functions
and the randomness is all in dB.
And we know the nice properties of dB,
of our Brownian increment.
We know that this is a normal random variable with mean 0
and variance dt.
Now Ito's lemma tells us how we can take these functions of x,
where x is generally not differentiable,
but F is a differentiable function of t and x,
and how we can find out how it behaves, how it evolved.
And I've shown you two ways of framing it.
And I'd like to sort of add a third hybrid way that
can also be useful.
It doesn't really add anything new,
but it's another thing to keep in mind because it's
an extra approach for solving different kinds of problems.
So remember that we saw that we can write things
in differential form.
And in certain cases, we can also integrate explicitly.
In particular, when the left and right hand side
do total differentials, we can write things out
in explicit form.
So let's take a look at an example
and just go through the different ways
that we can write dF.
So this is one of them.

So this is one of them where I write
things in terms of dt and dx.
And as we've seen in our derivations of Ito's lemma,
this is particularly convenient when the dx's are
going to cancel each other out.
So in this case, we think of writing the two functions
in square brackets that begin with F. They all
depend on derivatives of F. F is a function of t
and x, so we think of the square brackets
and writing them out as functions of t And x.
And that's just fine.
So from this point of view, the one other way
we might choose to write it is to take our expression for dx
and simplify, or expand depending
on how you look at it, by substituting in this value
here for dx, in which case, we have
our alternate expression where we can write this as dF equals
partial of F with respect to t plus b squared over 2,
our ito term, d2F dx squared.
And now we'll replace our dx by its definition.
So we'll include another term, this
plus a partial of F with respect to x times dt
plus b partial of F with respect to x plus dB.
So all I did was I expanded this term by substituting
what we had here, OK?
So in the top form, it's useful when we want to cancel the x's.
In the bottom form, it's useful when
we want to look at an ito process on its own.
And it's helpful to break things down to its lowest components
because dB is normally standardized.
Dx, that we have on the line above,
isn't necessarily standardized.
So depending on what we'd like to do,
we have different applications that might be useful.
The third thing I wanted to add, though,
is that sometimes, we'd like to express
the coefficient functions in the square brackets,
not in terms of t and x, but in terms of t and F.
That is, we'd like to have a complete replacement,
a complete transformation of the variable from x into F.
And in certain cases, that will be possible.
In some other cases, it won't.
So let's take a look at an example
that we can write in three different ways.
Exercise.
Let's let dx evolve according to ux dt plus sigma x dB.
So our coefficient functions a and b in this case
are replaced by the definite values
that we've seen in this familiar form.
Little a is equal to mu times x.
Little b is equal to sigma times x.
And let's suppose that we have a function F which is equal to e
to the minus rt where r is a constant--
think of it as being a risk free rate--
times x squared.
So here's the exercise.
Write out df in three different ways.
Write it first as a function of something dt plus something dx.
Then write it is something dt plus something dB.
And then, finally, write it again as something dt plus
something dB, but this time, without any explicit x's.
See if you can write it strictly in terms of F. And if you can,
what kind of interpretation does it have?
Take a moment to look at that, to work it out, and then
come back and we'll solve it together.

All right, let's begin by taking partial derivatives, shall we?
So we know that equal to e to the minus rt times x squared.
So partial of F with respect to t is going to be minus r
e to the minus rt times x squared partial of F
with respect to x.
It's going to be e to the minus rt times 2x.
And the second partial derivative
of F with respect to x squared is
going to be simply twice e to the minus rt.
So let's take these results and put them
into our formula for Ito's lemma.
So we have the df in our first expression
is going to be partial of F with respect to t.
That's going to give us a minus r e to the minus rt x squared
plus b squared over 2, which is going
to be sigma x quantity squared over 2 times
the second partial derivative with respect
to x squared, which is going to be times 2 e to the minus rt.

This is the expression that multiplies dt.
Plus, the coefficient for dB is simpler
because it's just the first partial with respect to x.
So it's e to the minus RT times 2x dx.
So if we simplify terms a little bit,
we notice that everything gets multiplied by an e
to the minus rt, so we could take that out in front
if we like.
Each of the terms will have an e to the minus rt.

Now we know this it's going to have an x squared times
minus r plus sigma squared dt.
That is, we notice there's an x squared here
and there's an x squared here that came from our ito term.
And there's no x over there.
So I have an x squared and an x squared.
We're minus r from taking the derivative.
And sigma squared over 2 multiplied by 2,
which just gives me sigma squared.
In the second term, it's going to be just as easy.

So it's going to be plus e to the minus rt times 2x dx.

Now at this point, we can make an interesting observation
for that third form that we had.
Notice that the first line in our result right
here is a combination e to the minus rt and x squared.
But that's just the same as F.
So let's go ahead and rewrite this as F times sigma squared
minus r dt.
That's our first term.
And what about the second term?
Well, this is not equal to F. But suppose
that we multiply and divide by x.
In that case, we could write this as plus 2 F times dx
over x.
So what I've done is I've multiplied and divided.
In this line, I've multiplied this by x,
and I've divided this by x.
Now you notice I have F times something dt plus F
times dx over x.
And here, I can substitute back my original definition.
So let's keep going.
So this is going to be F times sigma squared
minus r dt plus 2F times dx over x,
which was mu dt plus sigma dB.

Let's combine these.
And this is our dt term is going to be
F times sigma squared minus r plus 2mu dt plus 2F sigma dB.
In other words, we could write this as dF over F
is equal to 2mu plus sigma squared minus r dt plus 2 sigma
dB.
So you notice that this form here for the ito process just
involves F. There are no explicit x's.
The way the x's entered was exactly in the right way that
we could group them together to make them into F's.
Now that worked because of the particular form
we chose for our ito process, but that's
a very common process, and it's a very useful form.
So in this case, I have an expression for dF written
in terms of dt plus dB, so we can see it's an ito process,
but there are no explicit x's.
We've changed variables completely,
so everything instead of depending on t and x,
now it depends on t and F. And, of course, our middle
form we can get just by doing our usual substitution
by writing out dx here and expanding the rest of the way.
And the values, we would have dF is going to be--
keeping everything in terms of the x's
and the partial derivatives that we had--
e to the minus rt x squared times minus r
plus sigma squared plus 2mu dt.

Let's see.
I think I need another parenthesis here somewhere.
Let's try putting one there.
OK, plus 2 sigma e to the minus rt x squared dB.
So just to make that clear, this is
something dt plus something dB.
And in this case, the coefficient functions of dt
and dB are just in terms of x's.
So if I were combining multiple things
and I had different versions of x,
this might be more convenient form.
If I wanted to study f on its own and ask how does f behave,
the line above, this one in the box,
might be easier to integrate.
So all of these are valid forms.
And in each case, all we need to do
is apply the rules for Ito's lemma, take the derivatives,
and substitute them in.
Which way we regroup them together and what's useful
is going to depend on the application that you have.

Just as one final extension of this,
if we wanted to go all the way and integrate the process F,
we could do the game that we did before where
now the expression in the box looks exactly
like the kind of expression that we had for geometric Brownian
motion.
DF over F is some constant times dt
plus some other constant times dB.
We'd look for the differential of log F. We know that that's
going to take this form, and we're
going to shift by the square of 2 sigma in the drift term
and get another expression.
And that would be integral.
There's another shorthand way that we could do it,
too, which is to use our definition of F
inside the differential.
So if we were to ask for d of log F,
we could use Ito's lemma on that process dF over F. Or are we
could say, well, this is just d of logarithm of e
to the minus rt times x squared.
And that's an ordinary function.
We could do that logarithm that says that this is d of minus rt
plus twice log X. And that tells us that this is minus r dt
plus twice d of log X. And we know what d of log X is.
And if we substitute in, we find the same result. OK,
we find that this is going to be equal to 2mu minus
sigma squared minus r dt plus 2 sigma dB.
Two ways of getting the same answer.