
PROFESSOR: Let's take a closer look at the diffusion equation.
So the general diffusion equation is given right here.
So we say that we have a function p of z and t,
and they need to satisfy this differential equation.
The first partial with respect to t
minus half the second partial with respect to z equals 0.
And we've seen that there's a very special solution, p0,
that satisfies that equation, which
we can find by plugging it in and taking some derivatives.
So here's our p0.
Now, I claimed that if we construct this integral on top,
that this is the solution to the equation.
So what I'd like to do is, let's check that,
and then let's apply it.
So the first thing to do is to check it.
And the way we do it is we take derivatives.
And what we find is that if we take that integral expression,
and we stick it into the differential equation, what
we'll do is, we'll move the differential operators inside.
So for example, the partial derivative
with respect to time of p of z and t
is the integral of the partial with respect to--
excuse me-- the partial with respect
to time of everything inside the integral P0 z minus wt f of w,
dw.

But where is the t dependence?
The t dependence is only in one place.
It's in p0.
And similarly with the second derivative.
So if I take the differential operator, partial with respect
to t minus 1/2 second partial with respect to z squared,
and I act on p, then that's the same thing
as this differential operator partial of t minus 1/2
second partial with respect to--

let me get our pens right--
z squared, times-- what are they going to act on?
Well, the only thing that depends on z and t is p0.
p0 z and t--
excuse me.

z minus w t of w, tw.
The only potential complication that we'd have to worry about
is this derivative act here on this t.
This is derivatives with respect to z.
This is not p0 of z and t, it's z minus w.
But because it's just shifted by a constant,
the derivatives are exactly the same.
So this operator, when I move it inside the integral,
acting on this part of the integrand gives 0.
And it doesn't matter what f is.
The integral is always going to be 0, provided
that the intervals converge.
And they will converge whenever t is greater than 0.
The limit t goes to 0 is a special case.
And we'll have more to say about that.
This is the reason why this integral form works.
So the reason it works is that, whenever
I act with the differential operator,
this piece here is the only thing that's hit,
and it vanishes.
So this expression necessarily solves
the differential equation.
If in addition, I get something that
has the right initial conditions, then I'm done.
I know that it satisfies the initial conditions.
I know that it satisfies the differential equation.
That's all we need to know.
So let's do a couple examples.
So exercise.
Suppose that f of z is z squared.
So this was an example that we did a lecture.
So I have the p of z comma 0 is equal to z squared.
And I say, find p of zt, or t in general,
at least for positive values of t.
So take a moment and go do that.
Take a look at the internals.
And then, we'll come back and we'll do that together.

OK.
Let's go.
Do you have an answer?
All right, well you probably have the same answer
that we had in lecture.
But let's do the integrals.
So what we need to do is, we've got a formula.
Let's just plug and chug.
So p of zt is going to be equal to the integral of 1
over square root of 2 pi, e to the minus z
minus w squared over 2t.
I should have put in a t down here.
Remember, it's a Gaussian where the variance is t.
So it's not completely standardized.
So there is t dependence in this.
And then, what we'd like to do is
multiply this times w squared tw.
So that's the integral that we'd like to do.
How do we do this integral?
Well, let's change variables.
So what we'd like to do is, let's simplify the exponent
and pick a new variable.
So let's let u be equal to w minus z divided
by square root of t.
That way, the thing in the exponential
up here is going to be e to the minus u squared over 2.
And that'll be a very simple form.
Then, because we have this differential form--
because we have this form for u, We also
have the du is going to be dw over square root of t.
But that's pretty good, because we have a dw right here,
and we have a square root of t down here.
So those are going to combine very nicely.
So let's make those substitutions.

And we'll see that p of z is going
to be equal to 1 over square root of 2
pi times the integral of e to the minus
u squared over 2 times--
we need a w squared.
Well, w-- if this is my expression for u,
then w is going to be u times square root of t plus z.
So let's write that out.
This is going to be u times square root of t, plus z.
Then we have that quantity squared du.
Well, that's pretty easy.
Because now we almost have things in standardized form
for a Gaussian interval.
And this goes from minus infinity to infinity.
So this is going to be 1 over square root of 2 pi integral
from minus infinity to infinity, e
to the minus u squared, times--
let's just expand that out.
We're going to have u squared times t plus 2u square root
of t times z plus z squared du.
Let's look at each of these terms.
The first term, right here, is going to be u squared times t.
Remember, t is a constant with respect
to the variable of integration.
So this is going to give us--
a first term will be t times 1 over square root of 2
pi integral should be over 2, e to the minus 2 squared over 2,
u squared du.
The second term, right here, is going to vanish.
Because it's linear in u, this is an even function in u.
We're going from minus infinity to infinity.
And even functions-- excuse me, odd functions
are going to have varnishing integrals.
It's just a plus sign to the minus sign
are going to cancel each other out.
And then, the last term, z squared that we have right
here, that's just a constant.
So we have plus z squared times 1
over square root of 2 pi, integral e to the minus u
squared over 2 du, without anything else.
Well, this expression is equal to 1.
And so is this expression.
Because this is just the variance
of the standardized Gaussian distribution.
So we do the integrals.
And what we're left with is z squared plus t.
And we can check that it satisfies our differential
equation.
If we take the partial of p with respect to t, we get 1.
If we take the second partial--
1/2 the second partial with respect to z squared, we get 1.
And if we subtract the two of them, we get 0.
So we're done.
So this is the answer.
Let's do one more exercise.
Slightly different version of the one that we did in lecture.
But now, don't refer back to the lecture.
Just take a look at what we've done for the integrals.
And do this one yourself.
So what I'd like to do is introduce the Gaussian
cumulative distribution function,
which is going to be useful and show up in a few places.
I will call this phi of x.
It's going to be defined as the integral of e to the minus z
squared over 2 dz, from minus infinity up to x.
So I compute the left side of the integral
of the bell curve for the Gaussian distribution
up to some point x.
So in terms of Gaussian probabilities,
this is the same thing as the probability
that a Gaussian random variable z is less
than some particular value x.
Now, from the fundamental theorem of calculus of course,
I know that d by dx phi of x is just e to the minus x
squared over 2.
So I can differentiate or I can integrate.
I can go back and forth.
But this basic idea that it's an incomplete integral.
So I integrate from minus infinity
up to a particular value x that's defined out here.
It's going to be useful, and we'll
see that it shows up in a bunch of places.
Here's a really simple example.
So exercise.

Let's let f of w equal 1 for w less than kappa,
and 0 for w greater than kappa.
So the question is, find p of zt,
where remember that this is p and z a time 0.
So at time 0, it's a step function.
It's either 0 or 1 depending on the value of its argument.
I apologize, this should be a w in that case.
So what we'd like to do is, we want to find p of zt
for the general case.
So take a moment, see if you can work it out
from our general definition.
Remember that our definition is, we integrate p0
against p0 evaluated at z minus w against the function f of w.
And we integrate that over w in an explicit expression
in terms of z.
Go take a moment to do that.
And then, we'll take a look at this together.

OK?
Let's go.
Let's just work from the definition.
The reason why this is particularly nice
is the integrand is either 1 or 0.
So there's an interesting generalization
that's important for the Black-Scholes case, where
we might-- instead of 1 or 0, we might
like to let it be 0 in the lower case, but kappa minus w
in the upper case.
So after you've done this one, I'd
suggest trying that one as an extension.
But this one's fairly straightforward.
So let's do this one together just
to make sure we've got the concepts and our definitions
of the integral.

So this is going to be integral of 1 over the square root of 2
pi t, e to the minus z minus w quantity squared over 2, dw--
now, the integrand is either 0 or 1.
So if it were 1, we would be done.
But because it's 0 for large values of w, for w
greater than kappa, our integral is only
going to go from minus infinity up to kappa.
So that's it.
So now you can recognize that apart
from the shift in the exponent-- and sorry,
I put my omissions in red.
There should be a t here just to match the t that's down here.
So now we need to do the Gaussian integral.
And as a function of kappa, what are we going to get?
So let's do the integral.
And the way we can do the integral
is, we can make the same change of variables as last time.
So let's let u equal w minus z over square root of t.
Implies that we have du is going to be dw over square root of t.
That's going to work the same as before.
In addition, our upper limit of integration is w equals kappa.
And that's going to translate into an upper limit of u
is going to be kappa minus z over square root of t.

So let's call that u star perhaps,
for upper limit of integration.
So now, we have making that change of variables.
p of zt is going to be the integral from minus
infinity up to kappa minus z over square root of t,
times 1 over square root of 2 pi, e
to the minus u squared over 2, du.
Now, there are no more t's in the integrand.
Everything in terms of a new variable
of integration, a dummy variable u.
And this is our definition of our function phi.
So this is now equal to phi kappa minus z, divided
by square root of t, which is a very well behaved function
for positive values of t.
And it would be interesting to take a look
and plot this as t goes to 0.
But right now, we have the result that we saw it.
And we can check this, again, by differentiating and putting it
into the differential equation, and verifying that it satisfies
the equation, and verifying that it
satisfies the initial conditions a t equals 0.
Which as I said, it requires taking a limit,
because we can't immediately set t equals 0
in this case in the way we did previously.
