
J. R. SCOTT: Hello, everyone.
And welcome to the fifth recitation of 15.4.35x.
In this recitation, we'll be reviewing two topics.
In the first topic, we'll see how
we can use the binomial model to numerically calculate the delta
and gamma of a call option.
In the second topic, we'll see how
we can use the binomial model to price
a more exotic option than the European call
and put options that we've seen in class thus far.
Without further ado, let's begin with the first topic.
Recall from the week five lecture
that the so-called Greeks delta, gamma, theta.
rho, and vega are widely used measures
of the sensitivity of an option's price
to various factors.
In particular, delta measures the sensitivity
of an option's value to changes in the price
of the underlying security.
According to the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
the delta of a European option on a non-dividend paying stock
has the following analytical expression:
delta, which is the first derivative of the option's
price, with respect to the price of the underlying stock,
is equal to n of d1 for calls and negative n
of negative d1 for puts.
Where p is the option's price, n is the cumulative density
function of a standard normally distributed random variable,
and d1 is as defined in the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
is a log of the price of the stock, divided
by the strike price, plus the risk free rate, plus one
half the volatility of the stock,
times the time to maturity, minus the current period,
divided by the volatility, sigma, times the square root
of T minus t.
It is true more generally and not
just for the Black-Scholes-Merton model
that call options will have positive deltas,
while put options will have negative deltas.
OK.
But what if we want to compute the delta of an option
without invoking the assumptions of the Black-Scholes-Merton
model.
In the week five lecture, we saw how
to calculate the price of a European call option
numerically using the binomial tree
simulator in the BinomialTree.xls spreadsheet.
By varying the price of the underlying stock
and recalculating the option price using the binomial tree
simulator, we can numerically approximate the derivative dP
over dS using the following formula : dP over dS,
the delta of the option, is approximately equal to the new
option price using the binomial tree simulator after varying
the price of the underlying stock,
minus the original option price, divided by the new stock price,
minus the original stock price.
As an example, let's use the BinomialTree.xls spreadsheet
to find the price of a European call option
on a stock with the following parameters:
note that these are the same parameters that you
saw in the week five lecture.
Mu, the expected return on the stock, is equal to 0.1 or 10%.
Sigma, the volatility of the stock, is equal to 0.3 or 30%.
The risk free rate, r, is equal to 2%.
The dividend yield is 0%.
The original value of the underlying stock is 100.
The strike price of the European call option is 100.
The time to maturity is 0.1.
And the number of intervals is equal to 10.
After inputting all of these parameters on the left hand
side here of the table below, you
should find that the price of the European call option,
according to the binomial model, is 3.787.
According to the binomial tree simulator,
we see that the price of the underlying
stock in the up node at step i equals 1, s1 one superscript u
is equal to 103.045, this cell on the spreadsheet.
Similarly, the price of the underlying stock.
in the down node at i equals 1 is S1 superscript
d, which is equal to 97.045, this cell on the spreadsheet.
The price of the call option at each step in node
is displayed in the table below.
In particular, the price of the European call option
in the up mode at step i equals 1 is c1 superscript
u, which is equal to 5.381.
The price of the European call option in the down node at step
i equals 1 is c sub 1 superscript
d, which is equal to 2.221.
We can plug-in S1 superscript u and S1 superscript d
into the numerator of equation one and c1 superscript u
and c1 superscript d into the denominator of equation one,
in order to numerically approximate delta as follows:
delta or dP over dS, is approximately
equal to the difference in the value of the European call
option in the up node at step one in the value
of the European call option in the down node at step 1,
divided by the value of the underlying stock in the up
node at step 1, minus the value of the underlying
stock in the down node at step one, which
is equal to 5.381 minus 2.221, divided by 103.045,
minus 97.045,
which gives us an approximate delta of 0.527.
The one thing to notice here is that this
is the exact same output as that reported
by the BinomialTree.xls spreadsheet
in the delta binomial cell, this cell here.

Essentially, the binomial tree simulator in the spreadsheet
calculates the delta of an option using
the u and d implied by the parameterization provided,
where u is equal to the exponential of sigma,
the volatility, times the square root of h, where
h is the length of the interval, T the maturity,
divided by n, the number of intervals.
Since d equals 1 over u, that is the percentage
increase in the stock is equal to the percentage
decrease in the stock, this numerical approximation
is akin to a symmetric difference quotient.
Alternatively, you could numerically approximate delta
by using a baseline parameterization,
like the one we have above for the binomial tree
to get these so-called original stock and option
prices in equation one and then vary the stock price
by a given amount in a single direction,
for example, a 6% increase, to get the new stock
and option prices.
As opposed to the symmetric difference quotient
that the binomial tree spreadsheet is providing,
this would be more akin to a one-sided difference quotient.
Now that we've seen how to numerically
approximate the delta of an option using
the binomial model, can we do the same thing
for the other Greeks?
Well, as discussed in the week five lecture,
gamma measures the sensitivity of delta,
changes in the price of the underlying security.
According to the Black-Scholes-Merton model,
the gamma of a European option, either a put or a call,
on a non dividend paying stock has
the following analytical expression:
gamma, which is the second derivative of the options
price, with respect to the price of the underlying stock,
is itself equal to the first derivative of the options
delta, with respect to the price of the underlying stock, which
is equal to the derivative of the cumulative distribution
function of a standard normally distributed range
of variable n of d1, divided by the price of the underlying
stock, times its volatility, sigma,
multiplied by the square root of its time to maturity, T,
where the first derivative of the cumulative distribution
function for a standard normal random variable
is given in this expression here:
mathematically, gamma measures the curvature of an options
price, with respect to the price of the underlying security.
Can we numerically approximate gamma
like we just did for delta?
The answer unsurprisingly is, of course.
The only difference now is that our numerical approximation
formula has in its numerator the difference
between the new value of the options delta after changing
the underlying stock price, minus the original value
of the options delta, divided by the difference
between the new stock price and the original stock price.
Whereas before, we had the difference
between the new price of the option,
minus the original price of the option.
For example, let's assume the same parameterization
for the European call option as above,
in particular with a current underlying stock price
S0 of 100.
Using the BinomialTree.xls spreadsheet,
we can calculate the delta for a symmetric 3% increase and 3%
decrease in the stock price.
In particular, for the 3% increase,
we plug-in S0 equals 100, times 1.03,
which equals 103 and find the delta of the call option
to be 0.647.
For the 3% decrease, we plug-in S0 equals 100, times 0.97,
which equals 97 and find the delta of the call option
to be 0.401.
Finally, we just apply equation two, but now
with the original values of delta and the stock price,
these two values here corresponding to the 3%
decrease case and the new values of delta and the stock price,
these two values here, corresponding
to the 3% increase case.
Overall, we have that the gamma of the call option
is approximately equal to 0.647 minus 0.401,
divided by 103, minus 97, which is equal to 0.041.
