
PROFESSOR: That concludes the first topic.
Now let's see how we can use the binomial model
to price an exotic option.
In the week five lecture, we saw how the binomial model
can be used to price European call and put options.
However, the binomial model is far more powerful.
And it can also be used to price more, quote,
"exotic" options with very complex payment structures.
For example, assume that a firm has
decided to offer a new type of exotic equity option.
The expiration date of the option is two periods from now.
And the option is not initially specified
to either be a put or a call.
Instead, the owner of the option makes this choice
after one period.
Once the choice is made the option
could be exercised at any time, just like an American option.
For example, if after one period the owner
chose for the new exotic option to be a put,
it would at that time become identical
to an ordinary American put option with the one period
remaining until expiration.
A customer is asked for a quote for an option
of this type on FA Inc. stock that has a strike price of 100.
The current price of FA Inc. stock is 100 per share.
In over each period, the stock price
evolves as shown in the tree diagram below.
The risk neutral probability of an up move in this case,
is 0.5.
The stock doesn't pay any dividends.
And the interest rate is 10% per period.
What is the lowest price the firm
could charge for the option and still break even?
Let's begin by first defining some notation.
Let C of S comma n and P of S comma n
be the values of American call and put options respectively,
when the underlying stock price is S
and there are n periods remaining until maturity.
As always, we begin to answer these questions
by finding the payoffs of both call
and put options at each node by moving
backwards through the tree.
Two periods from now, that is when
n, the number of periods remaining until maturity,
equals zero, the payoff of a call option
will be 256 minus the strike price of 100, which
equals 156 in the up-up node.
This node here.

0 in either the up-down or down-up node.
This one here, and also 0 in the down-down node.
This one here.
Similarly, the payoff of a put option
will be 0 in the up-up node.
100 minus 96, which is equal to 4,
in the up-down or down-up nodes.
And 100 minus 36, which equals 64, in the down-down node.
What would be the values of the call
and put options in each node one period from now--
that is, when n equals 1--
given the payoffs in each node at n
equals 0 that we just calculated,
the risk neutral probability of an up move of 0.5,
and an interest rate of 10% per period?
Let's begin by assuming that we are in the up node at n equals
1, and the stock price is 160.
On the tree diagram, we are in this node here.

If we choose to exercise the call option at this node--
remember this is an American call option--
then its payoff will be 160 minus the strike price of 100,
which is equal to 60.
Alternatively, if we choose to wait to exercise the call
option in the next period, that is at n equals 0,
then the value of the call option
is equal to the risk neutral probability of an up
move of 0.5 times 156--
that's the payoff of the call option in the up-up node at n
equals 0--
plus 0.5 times 0, which is the payoff of the call
option in the up-down node at n equals 0.
Discount that at the risk-free rate of 10%--
so divide by 1.1--
and we get 70.9091.
Thus, the value of the call option in the up node at n
equals 1, which we call C of 160, 1, is the maximum of 60--
that is the payoff if we choose to exercise the call
option at this node--
and the payoff from waiting.
The maximum of these two values is 70.9091.
A similar calculation for the put option at the up node at n
equals 1, you'll see value of P of 160,
1, which is equal to the maximum of the difference
between the strike price of 100 and the price of the stock
of 160, and the probability of an up move in a risk
neutral sense, times the payoff in the up-up mode
on the put option of 0, plus the probability of an up move
in a risk neutral sense, times the payoff of the put option
in the up-down node discounted at the risk-free rate of 10%,
which is the maximum of negative 60
and 1.8182, which is equal to 1.8182.
Now let's assume that we are in the down node at n equals 1,
and the stock price is 60.
So on the payoff diagram we are at this node here.

If we choose to exercise the call option at this node,
then its payoff will be the difference
between the stock price of 60 and the strike
price of the option of 100, which is equal to negative 40.
Alternatively, if we choose to wait to exercise this call
option in the next period at n equals 0,
then the value of the call option
is equal to the risk neutral probability of an up
move of 0.5 times the payoff of the call
option in the down-up node of 0, plus the risk
neutral probability of a down move of 0.5 times the payoff
of the call option in the down-down node of 0,
which discounted at the risk free rate of 10%
is equal to zero.
Thus, the value of the call option in the down node at n
equals 1 is C of 60, 1, which is the maximum of negative 40,
has the payoff if we choose to exercise the call
option at this node and the payoff
from waiting to exercise the call option of 0,
which is equal to zero.
A similar calculation for the put option,
you'll see value of P of 60, 1, which
is the maximum of the difference between the strike
price of the put option of 100 and the price
of the stock at the down node at n equals 1 of 60,
and the probability of an up move in the risk
neutral sense of 0.5 times the payoff of the put option
in the down-up mode at n equals 1, 4 plus the risk
neutral probability of a down move of 0.5 times the payoff
in the put option in the down-down node at n
equals 0 of 64 discounted at the risk free rate of 10%,
which is equal to the maximum of 40 and 30.9091,
which is equal to 40.
A lot of numbers are floating around here.
So to summarize, the values of the call and put options at n
equals 1, that is one period from the initiation
of the option, are as follows.

The value of the call option in the up mode at n
equals 1 is 70.9091.
The value of the put option in the up node n
equals 1 is equal to 1.8182.
The value of the call option in the down node at n
equals 1 is 0.
And the value of the put option in the down node at n
equals 1 is equal to 40.
Now armed with that information, we can determine two things.
First, whether or not the buyer of the option
will choose for the option to be a put
or a call option at each node at n equals 1.
And second, whether or not the buyer
will exercise the put or call option early at n equals 1,
or wait until n equals 0 to exercise the option.
First, let's consider the down node at n
equals 1 when the stock price falls to 60.
By comparing the value of the call
option in the down node at n equals 1 and the put option,
we see that the put option is the better choice.
Thus, the buyer will choose for the option
to be a put at the down node at n equals 1.
Second, we could see that the put
will be exercised immediately.
This comes from the calculation for the value of the put option
in the down node at n equals 1, which
was comparing the value of early exercise
of the put option of 40 and the value of waiting,
which was 30.9091.
Since the value of early exercise
is greater than the value of waiting,
we know that the buyer will choose for the put option
to be exercised immediately.
Now let's consider the case that the stock price instead
goes up to 160 in the up node at n equals 1.
When comparing the value of the call option
and the put option in this node, we
see that the call option is a better bet.
So the buyer will choose for the option in this node
to be a call.
Second, we could tell that the call will
be held until its expiration, because
in the up node n equals 1 when the stock price is 160,
the value of exercising the call option at that node
is 60, whereas the value of waiting to exercise the call
option is 70.9091.
Thus, it makes sense for the buyer
to hold the call until its expiration.

Finally, given the optimal exercise policy detailed above,
we can find the current value of the option, that
is the value at n equals 2, by discounting the expected
payoffs from exercising the put option in the down node at n
equals 1 and holding the call option
in the up node at n equals 1.
The current value of the option is given by the expression
below.
The risk neutral probability of an up move
of 0.5 times the value of the call
option in the up node that n equals
1, which is equal to 70.9091, plus the risk
neutral probability of a down move at n
equals 1 times the value of a put
option at the down node at n equals 1, which is equal to 40,
discounted at the risk-free rate of interest,
which is equal to 50.4132.
So the value of our option at initiation of the payoff
diagram is equal to 50.4132.
Well that concludes recitation five.
Thank you everyone for coming.
And I look forward to seeing you next week.