
PROFESSOR: In this lecture, we introduce an important class
of derivative securities-- forwards, futures, and swaps.
We'll go over the main properties of these securities
and discuss how they can be priced.
Our approach to valuation is based
on the principle of no arbitrage,
or the law of one price.
In each case, we aim to replicate the cash
flows of a derivative security by trading in other assets.
This allows us to establish a unique arbitrage-free price
for the derivative.
In this manner, we connect forward
interest rates to the spot rates,
futures prices, or financial futures to the current price
of the underlying asset, and the terms of an interest rate swap
contract with the current yield curve, among other results.
Financial contracts-- with many features
found in modern derivatives, such as forward, futures,
and options, date back to the early periods of human history.
In ancient Mesopotamia, over 3,000 years ago,
farmers and merchants entered into financial contracts,
making arrangements for future delivery
of grain or other commodities.
The contract would describe both the details of future delivery,
such as quantity of the goods and the price.
These contracts are what we now know as forward contracts.
Let us begin with the formal definition
of the forward contract.
A forward contract is a commitment
to buy or sell a given quantity of a commodity or an asset
at a future date at the price specified today.
The key feature of the contract is
that the price is fixed today, while the transaction itself
takes place in the future.
This contractual price is called the forward price.
At the settlement date of the contract,
the buyer pays the forward price and collects the underlying
asset--
a financial asset or a commodity.
The buyer thus obtains a long position
in the asset or commodity.
As an example, consider a forward contract on soybeans.
Suppose that the tofu manufacturer
needs 100,000 bushels of soybeans in 3 months.
The current price of soybeans in the market,
which we call the spot price, is $12.50 per bushel.
Going forward, this price may rise or fall.
Our producer of tofu wants to make
sure that 100,000 bushels will be available 3 month from now.
To remove any uncertainty about the price,
the producer enters into a 3-month forward contract
for 100,000 bushels of soybeans at $13.50 per bushel.
In this forward transaction, the long side buys 100,000 bushels
from the short side at $13.50 per bushel in 3 month
at the settlement date.
Forward contracts have several important features.
First, forwards are typically traded over the counter.
This means that buyers and sellers transact
with each other directly, as opposed to trading
on centralized exchanges.
Second, forward contracts can be easily customized.
The two parties-- the buyer and the seller--
can agree on various terms of the contract as they desire.
These contracts do not need to be standardized.
Third, no money changes hands until contact maturity,
or the settlement date.
The properties of the forward contracts
create some advantages and some limitations.
One of the advantages of forwards
is that, because these contracts are highly customizable,
they can be adapted to individual needs,
making them effective for risk management and speculation.
In addition, because no money changes hands
until the settlement date, counterparties
in the forward contract do not need to come up
with funds until that date.
This is convenient, for example, for a farmer trying
to fix the sale price of his harvest
in advance through a forward contract.
One of the disadvantages of forwards
is that the over-the-counter customized
nature of these contracts makes them relatively illiquid.
It is costly for one of the counterparties in the forward
to get out of the contract prior to its settlement.
Moreover, the fact that money does not change hands
during the life of the contract means that all gains and losses
are realized at the settlement date, which
creates counterparty risk.
The risk is that the losing side of the contract
may not fulfill their obligations at the settlement
date.
To prevent this, participants in the forward contract
need to post collateral, which they
would lose in the event of failing to honor
the terms of the contract.
This collateral requirement makes
it harder to enter into a forward contract.