
PROFESSOR: The risk-free rate of return between now
and the future date, t, is given by the corresponding spot
interest rate, r sub t.
In addition to the spot rates, we now introduce forward
interest rates.
Forward interest rates apply to transactions
between two future dates.
For instance, t equal to one, and t equal to two.
The forward trade between these two dates
is specified by a forward transaction
to borrow money for one period at a future date at t
equal to 1.
The terms of the forward transaction
are fixed today at t equals 0.
The loan is received at date one.
The loan is repaid at date two.
It is important to distinguish forward interest rates
from the future spot rates.
Future spot rates are random and are
generally different from the current forward rates.
Consider the following example.
As the CFO of a US multinational company,
you expect to repatriate 10 million dollars
from a foreign subsidiary in one year.
These funds will be used to pay dividends a year later.
You do not know what the spot interest rates
will be in one year from now.
To avoid randomness, you would like
to fix your lending rate for a period of one year starting
one year from now.
The current interest rates are as follows--
The one-year spot rate is 5%.
And the two-year spot rate is 7%.
What should you do?
Consider the following strategy.
Let's borrow $9,524,000 today for a period of one year
at the spot rate of 5%.
At the same time, we invest the same amount 9.524 million
for two years, at the two-year spot rate of 7%.
The resulting cash flows are shown in the following table--
The net cash flow at time 0 is 0.
We borrow and lend the same amount.
At time 1, we repatriate $10 million
and use it to repay the one year loan we took out at time, 0.
At time 2, our two-year investment matures.
And we collect $10,904,000.
As you can see, we were able to transform the 10 million
cash flow at time 1, into a cash flow of 10.904 million
at time 2.
In other words, we managed to lock in a one year lending
rate of 9.04%, starting one year from now.
We conclude that to avoid arbitrage,
the one-year forward interest rates starting
one year from now, must be equal to 9.04%.
The previous example shows that forward rates
are related to the spot rates by an arbitrage argument.
Let's use this logic to establish
a general relation between the spot and forward interest
rates.
Specifically, consider two alternative investment
strategies between now and time t.
The first strategy is to invest at the current spot interest
rate between now and time t.
In this case $1 invested today compounds for t periods
at the current spot rate, resulting in the time,
t value equal to the left hand side
of the highlighted formula.
Under the second strategy, we invest at the spot interest
rate for t minus 1 periods, and then
reinvest the proceeds at the one-period forward rate,
which is known today.
$1 invested today compounds for t
minus 1 period at the current spot rate for that tenor,
and then the growth for one more period at the forward rate,
resulting in the time, t value equal to the right-hand side
of the highlighted formula.
Because both strategies start with a dollar
and generate a risk-free cash flow at time t,
to avoid arbitrage, they must produce the same amount.
This argument allows us to relate
the one-period forward rate between time t minus 1
and t to the corresponding spot rates.
There is a one-to-one relation between the yield curve
or the term structure of the spot interest rates
and the term structure of the forward rates.
The following example illustrates
how we can apply the forward rate formula
and how to replicate forward contracts using transactions
in the spot market.
The current term structure of the spot rates
and the corresponding prices of discount bonds
are given in the table.
A customer of your bank wants to enter into a forward contract
to borrow $20 million for one year,
starting three years from now.
Can you quote a rate?
Using the formula for the forward rate,
with the spot rates for years three and four
equal to 6.5% and 7% respectively,
the one-year forward rate between year three and four
is 8.51%.
To lock in these cash flows today,
we execute the following transactions
in the spot market.
We buy three-year discount bonds,
with a face value of $20 million.
This costs $16,556,000 today.
We finance this purchase by selling four-year discount
bonds.
These have the face value of $21,701,000.
This generates the same amount, $16,556,000.
The net cash flow at time, 0 is 0 dollars.
And we are left with the liability
in the amount of 21,701,000 due in four years.
Our strategy results in two non-zero cash flows.
At time 3, our three-year bond pays off 20 million.
At time 4, our position in four-year bonds
matures, and we must repay 21,701,000.
The above cash flows correspond to a forward transaction, where
one borrows for one year, starting in year three,
at the forward rate of 8.51%.
We now return to the expectations hypothesis
and restate it as a relation between spot and forward rates.
Under the expectations hypothesis,
expected returns on all bonds are the same.
Take the current day to be time 0.
Using the definition of the forward rate,
the expectations hypothesis states
that as of now, the expected value of the one year spot rate
between time t and t plus 1 is equal to the current value
of the one year forward rate between time t and t plus 1.
In other words, under the expectations hypothesis,
current forward rates are unbiased predictors
of the future spot rates.
Empirically forward rates are biased predictors
of the future support rates.
They over-predict future spot rates on average.
The reason is that the forward rate
reflects a risk premium in addition
to the expectations of the future spot rates.