
PROFESSOR: In this segment, we use arbitrage arguments
to price forward contracts on financial assets.
Forward contracts exist for a broad range
of underlying assets.
A few examples include stock index forwards,
such as forwards on the S&P 500 index or on Nikkei.
For these contracts, the underlying asset
is a basket of stocks.
For forwards on fixed income assets,
the underlying asset is a fixed income instrument,
for instance a treasury bond.
The interest rate forward contracts
were considered above fall into this category,
since they are equivalent to forwards on risk-free bonds.
Another important example is a currency forward,
where the underlying asset is a currency.
We start with some notation.
We take the current day to be time, 0.
The current spot price of the underlying asset is S sub-zero.
We denote the spot price of the underlying at the settlement
date of the forward, also called the maturity date,
by tilde S sub capital T. The tilde in this expression
reminds us that the spot price at time capital T,
is a random variable, not known at time 0.
The forward price is F sub T. This value is known today.
The forward price is fixed today so
that the current market value of the forward contract
equals to 0.
We assume that the risk-free rate is constant.
We denote the continuously compounded interest rate by r.
Next, we introduce the payoff diagram
of the forward contract.
Forward contracts are derivative securities.
The payoff of a forward at the maturity date
is tied to the price of the underlying asset.
The payoff of the forward is a linear function
of the underlying price at maturity.
For the long position and the forward,
that's the perspective of the buyer,
the payoff equals the difference between the spot
price and the forward price.
For the short position, the payoff
is the negative of the payoff off for the long position.

We now show how to price forward contracts on financial assets.
We'll link forward prices to the spot prices.
Note that there are two ways to buy the underlying
asset for date, t delivery.
We can enter into a forward contract
with the settlement date, t.
Alternatively, we can buy the underlying asset now
and hold it until date, t.
These two strategies result in the same outcome at time, t.
We can use this observation to establish
a relation between the forward price
and the current spot price of the underlying asset.
To do that, we need to model the payout of the underlying asset.
Consider a financial asset paying dividends,
or in case of fixed income assets, coupons.
We assume that the asset pays a continuous flow of dividends,
with the flow rate proportional to the asset price.
In other words, the dividend yield on the asset,
which we'll call y, is constant.
We assume that as soon as dividends are paid,
they are immediately reinvested into the same asset.
As a result, the size of the position,
measured by the number of units of the asset,
grows exponentially at the rate of the dividend yield, y.
Suppose we start with one share of the asset
and reinvest the dividends continuously.
Then by time, t, we end up holding the exponential
of y times t shares.
Therefore to accumulate one share by time,
t, we need to start with exponential of minus y times
t shares.
We conclude that the present value of S sub T, which
is the price of one share at time, t,
is equal to the current value of the exponential of minus y
times T shares, or exponential of minus y times T
times the current spot price.
We are now ready to determine the arbitrage free forward
price.
Consider the payoff of the forward contract at maturity.
We take the perspective of the buyer.
The payoff is the difference between the spot
price of the underlying asset at maturity and the forward price.
The forward price is set so that the market
value of the forward contract today is 0.
This means that the present value of the payoff
of the forward contract is 0.
We have derived the present value of the time, t spot price
above.
The present value of the forward price
is simply an adjustment for the time value of money.
We conclude that the forward price
is a product of the current spot price
and the exponential function of the difference
between the risk-free interest rate
and the yield on the underlying asset times t,
which is time to maturity.
Based on our derivation of the forward price,
we can see how to replicate the payoff of the forward contract.
Again, consider the long position in the forward.
We replicate two components of the forward's payoff.
To obtain the payoff at maturity equal to the spot
price of the underlying asset, we
buy the exponential of minus y times
T units of the underlying asset today and reinvest
the dividends back into the asset continuously
until maturity.
To obtain the payoff at maturity equal to the negative
of the forward price, we borrow the present value
of the forward price.
This result in trading strategy has zero initial value
and produces a payoff equal to the payoff
of the forward contract at maturity.
As an application of our results,
consider an example of a forward contract on the stock index.
The underlying asset is a basket of stocks,
which pays dividends.
Our task is to learn about the future dividend yield
from current market prices.
We're given the following data.
These numbers are for illustration purposes.
Suppose it is currently the end of June
and the S&P 500 index just closed at 3,000.
There exists a forward contract on the S&P 500
index with the settlement date at the end of September.
This is three months from now.
The most recent forward price is 2,995.
The three-month continuously the compounded interest rate
is 1.5%.

We start with the relation between the forward price
and the current spot price, which
includes, among other variables, the dividend
yield on the underlying asset.
Inverting the formula, we find that the implied dividend
yield is 2.17%.
