
PROFESSOR: We now consider a currency forward
and connect currency forward prices to exchange rates
and interest rates.
A currency forward is a forward contract
to exchange a unit of one currency
for a specified number of units of another currency.
For example, one may enter into a contract to exchange one
Swiss franc for a specified number of US dollars,
say $1.10 three years from now.
This number is the forward exchange rate,
and it depends on contract maturity.
For contracts with shorter or longer maturities,
forward rates differ.
We can use our previous results on pricing
of financial forwards to determine how forward exchange
rates are related to the spot exchange rates
and risk-free interest rates in the two currencies.
Suppose the forward price is F sub T US dollars for one
Swiss Franc, where the forward contract
matures at time T. Let X sub T denote the spot exchange rate.
This is the current price of one Swiss Franc in US dollars.
Consider the two risk-free rates rUSD and rCHF.
These are continuously compounded spot interest rates
for investments between now and time, capital T,
in US dollars and Swiss francs, respectively.
Consider a position with Swiss francs invested
at the Swiss risk-free rate.
The number of Swiss francs in the position
grows exponentially between now and time T
at the Swiss risk-free rate.
We conclude that for the purposes
of pricing a forward contract, the Swiss franc position
is equivalent to a financial asset with a dividend
yield equal to the Swiss interest rate.
We conclude that the forward exchange rate
is given by the relation we have established
above for financial forwards.
The forward exchange rate is a product of the spot exchange
rate, X at time 0, and the exponential
of the time to maturity of the contract multiplied
by the difference between the two risk-free rates, the US
dollar rate minus the Swiss franc rate.
This relation between the forward exchange rate, the spot
exchange rate, and the two interest rates
is called the covered interest rate parity.
This is a no arbitrage relation.
To replicate the payoff of the currency forward,
we again refer to our general results for financial forwards.
At time 0, we performed the following transactions.
First, we borrow a dollar amount equal to the forward exchange
rate, scaled by an exponential function of time to maturity,
multiplied by the negative of the US interest rate.
Note that given the expression for the forward rate,
this dollar amount is equal to the spot exchange rate
X, scaled by an exponential function of time to maturity,
multiplied by the negative of the Swiss interest rate.
Second, we convert the borrowed amount
into Swiss francs at the spot exchange rate today.
Third, we invest the proceeds at the Swiss risk-free interest
rate until time T. By the maturity date of the forward,
the long position in Swiss francs
grows in value to one Swiss franc.
At the same time, the borrowed dollar amount results
in the cash flow equal to the negative of the forward price.
The bottom line, we have replicated the payoff
of the forward contract using transactions
in the spot markets.