
PROFESSOR: We now introduce futures contracts.
A futures contract is an exchange
traded standardized financial contract
similar to the forward.
The main distinction from the forwards
is that futures contracts are marked to market daily.
We will discuss the details of the mark
to market process in a minute.
Unlike the forwards, futures contracts are standardized.
Terms of futures contracts include the description
of the underlying commodity or asset, the quantity
of the underlying to be delivered,
and the settlement or maturity date.
Futures contracts also specify the type of settlement.
Some contracts involve physical delivery
of the underlying asset.
For other contracts, physical delivery
is not desirable or not possible.
Such contracts are settled in cash.
For instance, consider a futures contract
on the stock market index.
Physical delivery would involve delivering all the stocks
in the index.
Instead, such contracts can be settled in cash,
based on the value of the index at contract maturity.
Futures contracts trade on a number
of centralized exchanges.
Some of the largest exchanges are the CME group,
the National Stock Exchange of India,
the Intercontinental Exchange, the CBOE, and Eurex.
Trading in futures involves little counterparty risk
because all trades on exchanges go through the clearinghouse.
While we think of a futures contract
as a financial transaction between the buyer
and the seller, in reality each transaction
is broken into two major transactions.
The clearinghouse acts as the counter party
to both the buyer and the seller.
This significantly reduces the risk
of counterparty default faced by the market participants.
Gains and losses on futures positions
are recognized, or marked to market, daily.
Daily gains and losses are settled
using the margin accounts.
To make sure that this process functions properly,
buyers and sellers of futures are
required to maintain a certain level of collateral
in their margin accounts.
As an example, consider a futures contract
on crude oil traded on NYMEX.
This contract specifies the delivery date and the futures
price.
Each contract is for 1,000 barrels of oil.
In this example, the initial margin is $3,960.
To enter into the futures contract,
both the buyer and the seller must deposit this amount
into their margin accounts.
Note that this amount represents a small fraction
of the value of oil covered by a single contract.
This allows futures traders to achieve
large economic exposures with limited capital.
In other words, futures contracts
allow for a significant degree of leverage.
The maintenance margin is $3,600.
This is a trigger.
Once the balance in the margin account
falls below the maintenance margin,
traders are required to restore the margin balance to the level
of the initial margin.
Alternatively, their position may be reduced or liquidated.
When traders enter into this contract,
no cash changes hands.
The total market value of the contract is zero.
We say that the buyer holds a long position.
The long positions gains if the futures price rises.
The seller holds a short position and benefits
from price declines.
Next, let's take a closer look at the mark to market process,
and the cash flows it generates.
We will compare a futures contract to a forward.
We start with the forward.
This is a contract on 1,000 ounces of gold.
Suppose the current date is December 12,
and the buyer and the seller enter
into the forward contract maturing
on the 15th of December.
The two counterparties entered into the contract
with the forward price of $500 per ounce.
No money changes hands until the settlement date, December 15.
On the 15th, the buyer pays the seller
$500 per ounce for 1,000 ounces of gold
and the seller delivers gold to the buyer.
Next, consider the futures contract.
The parameters are the same.
The buyer and the seller enter into the contract
on December 12 with the futures price of $500 per ounce.
Later that day, the futures contract closes at $495
per ounce.
That is the settlement price for that day.
This represents a gain of $5 per ounce for the seller
and the corresponding loss for the buyer.
The next day, on December 13, the buyer
will see $5 per ounce deducted from her margin account,
and the seller will have $5 per ounce
credited to the margin account.

Suppose that on the 13th, the futures contract
settles at $491 per ounce.
This is a $4 per ounce gain for the seller
and the loss for the buyer.
The next day $4 per ounce is deducted from the buyer's
margin account, and the same amount
is credited to the seller's account.
The above process of daily settlement
continues until the maturity date of the contract.
On December 16, two things happen.
First, the buyer gains $1 per ounce,
and the seller loses the same amount
due to the most recent price change
relative to the previous day close.
This is the last mark-to-market transaction on this contract.
Second, the seller transfers 1,000 ounces of gold
to the buyer, and the buyer pays the settlement price
on the previous day, which is $498 per ounce.
Note that the cumulative gain or loss on the futures contract
is the same as on the forward.
It is $2 per ounce, based on the difference
between the initial futures price of $500
and the closing price of $498 on December 15.
The difference between forwards and futures is in timing.
Under the forward contract, the total gain or loss
are realized at contract maturity.
Under the futures contract, gains and losses
are realized incrementally, with daily mark-to-market
throughout the life of the contract.
Both forwards and futures prices are
linked to the spot price of the underlying asset.
The difference between the two contracts
is in the timing of cash flows due
to the mark-to-market process for futures.
In this class, we ignore the effect
of mark-to-market on pricing.
We assume that the futures price, which
would denote by H sub T is approximately
equal to the forward price.
Know that futures and forward prices
may not be the same under stochastic interest rates,
in which case one needs to develop separate pricing
results for the futures contracts.