
PROFESSOR: We now consider futures on commodities.
We can price commodity futures using
the same type of arbitrage argument
as for financial futures.
In contrast to the financial futures,
the net payout of commodity futures
must reflect storage costs and any effective benefit
from holding the physical commodity.
This benefit is called convenience yield.
We assume that storage costs accumulate continuously
with the flow rate proportional to the market
value of the commodity.
Then, our original valuation formula
for financial forwards and futures
applies here, with the dividend yield
replaced by the net convenience yield
from holding the commodity.
The net convenience yield captures
the benefits of storing the commodity, net
of storage costs.
As an example, consider a futures contract on gold.
Gold is often held for long-term investments rather than
industrial production.
We assume that storing gold produces no convenience yield.
Gold is also relatively easy to store.
Therefore, we assume that storage costs are negligible.
Under these assumptions, net convenience yield on gold
is equal to 0.
We conclude that the futures price of gold,
which is approximately the same as the forward price,
is equal to the current spot price, multiplied
by the exponential function of the risk-free rate,
times the time remaining until contract maturity.
To illustrate how well our pricing
formula for gold futures works in the data,
consider the gold futures contract
on the 1st of July of 2019.
The spot price of gold at the time was $1,387.45 per ounce.
The futures price for the contracts maturing
in October of the same year, traded on the CME,
was $1,397.80 per ounce.
Based on our pricing formula for gold futures,
the relation between the futures price and the spot price
implies that the continuously compounded interest
rate is 2.23%.
This is very close to the rate on the three month T-bill,
which at the time was 2.05%.
Next, consider oil futures.
In contrast to gold, inventories of oil
are typically held for future use
and not for long-term investment.
Oil is also relatively costly to store.
This means that storage of oil incurs both benefits
and physical costs.
Our valuation equation reflects this
through the term representing the net convenience
yield on storing oil.
As an example, on the 19th of July of 2019,
the spot price of crude oil was $55.68 per barrel.
The futures price for the NYMEX contracts
for delivery in October of the same year
was $55.83 per barrel.
The three-month continuously compounded interest rate
at that time was 2.3%.

With the futures contracts being 3 and 1/2 month expiration,
our valuation formula implies the annualized net convenience
yield of 1.4%.
This is what market prices tell us
about the marginal costs and benefits of storing oil
at that time.
Based on our examples, we see that the futures prices
of commodity contracts may be above or below the current spot
price.
Whether futures prices increase or decline with maturity
depends on the economics of storing the underlying
commodity and the current state of the market and inventories.
When futures prices increase with maturity,
it is said that the forward curve is in contango.
Otherwise, it is in backwardation.
Under this definition, backwardation
occurs when the net convenience yield exceeds the interest
rate.
Note that sometimes definitions of contango and backwardation
adjust for the time value of money.
The following plot illustrates various shapes
of the forward curves one may observe in the market.
The forward curve for gold is practically flat,
which is consistent with the low level of the risk-free rate.
The curve for oil is in contango,
which means that the net convenience yield on storing
oil is relatively low.
In contrast, for iron ore, net convenience yield
is relatively high.
And this curve is in backwardation.
Finally, the forward curve for natural gas
shows fluctuations in relation to seasonal demand patterns.
Natural gas is relatively difficult to store.
Therefore, our pricing model is not
very useful for explaining prices
of longer-dated natural gas contracts.
Storage-based models are also more suitable
for short-dated agricultural contracts,
such as sweet futures than for longer dated contracts,
which are affected by supply from future harvests.