
PROFESSOR: Swaps are important and commonly-used
derivative contracts, closely related
to forwards and futures.
A swap is a contract in which two counterparties agree
to exchange specified amounts of assets, such as cash,
financial assets, or commodities at a set of given future dates.
The figure below offers a stylized representation
of a swap between two counterparties, A and B.
The upward-pointing arrows represent
cash flows collected by investor A. The downward-pointing arrows
are the cash flows collected by investor B.
Note that the times series profile of these cash flows
differs.
In the case of investor A, fixed payments
are received each period, while payments of investor B
fluctuate randomly.
Consider an interest rate swap.
Under this contract, a fixed rate of interest
is exchanged for a reference floating rate.
A popular choice for the reference rate
for interest rate swaps is LIBOR, the London InterBank
Offered Rate.
Under the swap contract, payments
are made periodically, for instance,
at the end of each six-month sub-period.
Consider an example of a LIBOR swap.
Assume the current one-month LIBOR is 0.5%.
You enter into a five-year fixed for floating swap with a fixed
rate of 0.7%.
If LIBOR rises in the future, you
receive higher payments on the floating leg
and continue making fixed payments
on the fixed leg of the swap.
As a result, the swap represents a bet on higher future values
of LIBOR.
We now analyze the valuation of interest rate swaps.
Suppose that at the end of each period, t,
the floating leg of the swap pays the spot
risk-free rate over that period, which is r of t minus 1.
The fixed leg of the swap pays a fixed interest rate, r sub s.
The fixed rate is chosen so that the swap contract has
zero market value initially.
This means that no money changes hands at time 0.
The swap covers t periods, with payments
made at the end of each period.
We want to use arbitrage arguments to determine
the fixed rate r sub s.
To do that, we first establish a useful relation
between the forward rates and the future spot rates.
Consider two investment strategies.
Both start with $1 invested at time 0.
Under strategy 1, we initially invest $1 at the spot
risk-free rate until time, t.
Then we reinvest the proceeds for one more period
at the prevailing one-period spot rate at time, t.
Under strategy two, we also start with $1
and invest it at the spot risk-free rate until time, t.
Then we reinvest the proceeds for one more
period at the forward rate, which we'll lock in at time 0.
The two strategies produce different payoffs.
The payoff of the first strategy is random
and depends on the future spot rate at time, t.
The payoff for the second strategy is non-random.
Both of these payoffs are generated
with $1 initial investment.
So the time 0 present value of the payoff for both strategies
is $1.
Compare the payoffs of the two strategies.
We conclude that the time 0 present value of the cash
flow equal to the one-period spot trade between t and t
plus 1, paid at the end of that period,
is equal to the time 0 present value of the cash
flow equal to the one period forward rate
between t and t plus 1, also paid
at the end of the same period.
Recall that in contrast to the present value relation
that we just established, the expected value
of the future spot rate is not equal to the forward rate.
The reason for the difference is that the forward rate reflects
a risk premium in addition to the expectations
of the future spot rate.
We are now in a position to calculate the rate on the fixed
leg of an interest rate swap.
The present value of the fixed leg of the swap
is equal to the value of an annuity paying the fixed
rate for t periods, which is simply the fixed
rate multiplied by the sum of discount bond prices
with maturities from 1 to capital
T. The present value of the cash flows generated by the floating
leg of the swap is equal to the sum of present values
of individual payments, each of which
is equal to the current one-period spot interest
rate paid at the end of the corresponding period.
We impose that no money should change hands initially.
And therefore the time 0 present value
of the payments on the two legs of the swap must be the same.

As we compare the two present values,
we use the result we just established.
The present value of the future spot rate
is equal to the present value of the corresponding forward rate.
We conclude that the rate on the fixed leg of the swap
is equal to a weighted average of the forward rates
from period 1 to capital T, with the weights proportional
to the market prices of the corresponding discount bonds.
We now reinterpret our expressions
for the fixed swap rate.
We start with the weighted average of forward rates,
and use the relation between the forward rate and spot interest
rates, or equivalently, discount bond prices.
Simplifying the expression, we find that the fixed rate
is a ratio of two terms.
In the numerator, we have the difference between 1
and the price of the discount bond maturing at the same time
as the swap at time capital T.
In the denominator we have the sum of discount bond prices,
maturity from one to capital T. We
should note that the derived expression for the swap rate
is equivalent to the coupon rate on the coupon bond
maturing at time, t and trading at par today.
This equivalence follows from the highlighted equation
for the bond price, which imposes
the condition that the bond trades at par today.