
PROFESSOR: So far, we have focused on the valuation
of assets, financial or real.
In particular, in the corporate finance context
we have applied the general asset valuation methodology
using market prices to the valuation of real assets
or investments.
This is about the question of what projects to invest in.
What we want to consider next is how
a firm makes its financing, payout, and risk management
decisions.
We examine these decisions one at a time.
We first consider a firm's financing decisions,
namely how to meet the firm's funding needs.
We will start out by taking investment decisions as given,
and focusing on how to fund them.
Later in lecture 19 we will further consider situations
in which investment and financing
decisions are connected and how to make them jointly.
Given a firm's funding needs, determined by its investment
decisions, there are often multiple funding sources.
They include internal funds like cash, debt by borrowing,
equity by issuing stocks, other financial claims like warrants,
convertibles, and so on.
The question is, what is the best source of funds?
In addition, even within each type of funding source
there are a rich set of choices.
For internal funds, for example, we
can choose between cash reserves versus cutting dividends.
For debt we can choose between bank loans versus bonds.
For equity there's VCs versus IPO, PE versus SEO, and so on.
In general, we refer to how a firm's assets
are financed or funded as its capital structure.
It represents the set of financial claims
against the firm's assets or cash flows,
which is the liability side of the balance sheet.
These claims typically differ in their financial
characteristics, such as pay off structure,
like fixed promise versus discretionary payments;
priority, like debt paid before equity; maturity, for example,
long versus short term debt; covenants, voting and control
rights, options, and so on.
We will start with the simplest and most basic claims, debt
and equity.
The mix of debt and equity is also referred to as leverage.
No leverage means no debt.
And higher leverage means more debt
relative to equity or total capital.
Therefore, the basic question we're interested in
is, is there an optimal capital structure
or mix of debt and equity given the firm's assets?
More generally, the question is, can we add value to the firm
by following a good financing policy,
or choosing the right hand side of the balance sheet?
If the answer is yes, the next question
is, what determines this optimal financing policy, and how?
In this course, we will mainly focus
on leverage, or the choice between debt and equity,
and how it affects the firm's value.