
PROFESSOR: We will start our analysis
by looking at some data on a firm's capital structure
choices.
These data not only tell us about some facts on the ground,
but also provide valuable empirical guidance
to our analysis.
The figure on the slide shows the average leverage level
of major US firms.
The time span is from 1970 to 2019
as represented by the x-axis.
The y-axis shows the average leverage ratio,
which is defined here by the ratio of debt
to asset, which equals debt plus equity.
The blue bars show the debt to asset ratio using their book
values.
And the red bars show the ratio using market values.
In terms of book value, the leverage level
is fairly stable.
It moves around 50%.
There's a substantial rise in the average leverage
level after 2008 financial crisis,
but the trend is reversed in 2019.
In terms of market value, the leverage level
is lower and more variable.
It fluctuates between 25% and 50% during this time period.
Looking more closely, we also notice
that during the years of rising stock
market, such as in the 1990s, 2000s, and after 2016,
the market leverage level decreases,
mostly due to the rise in equity value.
In the years of large stock market declines,
such as 1990, 2001, and 2008, the market leverage level
spikes up substantially.
But on average, especially over the recent decades,
the market leverage ratio is mostly around 30%.
What is shown on this slide is how much
firms rely on different sources of funds.
The time span is from 1979 to 1997, shown
by the x-axis in the figure.
The y-axis shows the percentage of new financing from three
major funding sources--
internal funds, debt issuance, and equity issuance for US
companies during this period.
The black bars show the percentage
of internal financing.
It ranges from 60% to above 80%.
Clearly, internal funds are the major source
of financing for most firms.
The purple bars represent the percentage of debt financing.
It varies from 10% to 40% roughly, depending on the year.
Equity financing is given by the gray bars.
It actually fluctuates around zero, ranging from minus 20%
to a few positive percentage points.
Here, negative equity financing simply
means that firms are buying back their shares, returning money
to the shareholders.
From this figure, we make the following observations.
Firms rely mostly on internal funds for investments.
When external funds are needed, they rely more on debt
than equity.
In particular, firms do not rely on equity
as a main source of external financing.
Although the sample shown in the figure
is a bit short and not up to date,
but the general pattern as outlined above is quite robust.
This pattern in firms' financing choices
is sometimes also referred to as the pecking order theory.
It is an interesting fact to keep in mind.
We will return later to discuss a bit more
about the possible reasons for such a phenomenon.
The data before shows the average leverage level
and funding patterns across all firms.
What we will consider next is the variation
in firms' leverage across different industries.
The table on the slide shows the capital structure
for a subset of industries in the US at the end of 2019.
The first column lists several major industries.
And the second column gives their market leverage level.
That is the debt to capital or asset ratio
in percentage terms.
The first industry in the table is telecom equipment,
shown in the second row.
The market leverage level for this industry
is 46%, which is on the high side.
Going down the list, we have coal and related energy,
chemicals (basic), food processing, paper and forest
products.
Their market leverage levels are all
in the 30s in percentage terms.
The next group is general retailers
and software, internet.
Their leverage level is in the teens.
The largest industry in the table
is software, entertainment.
Its leverage level is 1%.
That is, for this industry, there's
practically no leverage at all.

The last row in the table gives the average leverage
level across all industries, excluding
the financial industry due to its very high leverage level.
This average is 38% as we have seen before.
The data from the table clearly tells us
that leverage can be quite different
across different industries.
Naturally, we would like to understand why.
Our analysis on capital structure
should help us with this.
Before we move on, it's also helpful to briefly review
the return and the risk characteristics
of corporate debt and equity, which
we have examined in more detail in part one of this course.
The table on the slide lists the return and the risk
estimates for the major asset classes in the US
using their historic returns.
We're mostly interested in three of them--
long-term corporate debt, large stocks, and small stocks.
Long-term corporate bonds yield an average return
of 6.3% per year with a return volatility of 8.4%.
Large stocks yield an average return of 11.9% per year
and a return volatility of 19.8%.
Small stocks have an average return of 16.2%
and return volatility of 31.6% per year.
Clearly, corporate debt and equity
have significantly different return and risk
characteristics.
In particular, the markets' required rate of return
is much higher on stocks than bonds, for good reason
since stocks are much riskier.
