
PROFESSOR: We now start our analysis on capital structure.
The game plan is as follows.
First, we'll start with the simple situation
when there are no frictions in the financial market.
Under these ideal conditions, we will
find that capital structure is irrelevant.
That is, given the SSI of a firm's balance sheet,
choices on the right-hand side of the balance sheet
does not change the firm's value.
This is the well-known Modigliani-Miller theorem.
We will then incorporate different types of frictions
into the analysis and see how they may influence a firm's
capital structure choices.
These frictions include taxes, cost of financial distress
when there's debt, other frictions in a financial market
such as transaction costs, asymmetric information, agency
costs, and so on.
In general, capital structure is no longer irrelevant
when there are frictions.
Finally, we will put the different pieces together
to arrive at a more comprehensive perspective
on capital structure choices.
We focus on 1 in this lecture, and we turn to 2 and 3 later.
Let us consider the world without frictions.
In particular, we'll assume the following.
First, a complete financial market,
which means that we have a rich set of traded securities
in a market; second, an information-efficient market
and no information asymmetry; three, no taxes;
four, no transaction and bankruptcy costs; five,
hold constant the firm's investment or asset.
Under the assumptions above, we have
the Modigliani-Miller irrelevance theorem.
First, financing decisions are irrelevant for a firm's value.
Second, in particular, the choice of capital structure
is irrelevant.
As we will see, the first part of the MM theorem
is quite general.
The second part is a specific corollary
of the irrelevance theorem for capital structure.
It is sometimes also referred to as the MM theorem 1.
What we want to do next is to provide
a more formal proof of MM 1.
The purpose of this is not for mathematical exercise,
but to gain deeper understanding of the profound insight of MM.
For convenience, let's introduce some notation.
Let V denote the value of a firm's asset or a project's.
Let D denote the value of its debt;
E denote the value of its equity.
All values are in market values.
Let rA, rD, and rE denote the required rates of return
on the firm's asset, debt, and equity respectively.
Furthermore, let CFA denote the total payoff
from the firm's asset.
CFD and CFE denote the payoff to the firm's debt and equity
respectively.
Then we have CFD plus CFE equals CFA.
That is, the payoffs to debt and equity must sum to the payoff
to the firm's asset.
Since the firm's asset is held constant,
all its payoff must be paid out either to debt holders
or to equity holders.
By no arbitrage, we'll have the following--
the present value of the cash flow
to debt plus the present value of the cash flow to equity
must equal to the present value of the cash flow to the asset,
or D plus E equals A.
We then have the following conclusions.
First, a firm's value is determined by the total cash
flow of its asset.
Second, capital structure only determines
how the total cash flow is distributed between debt
and equity holders.
Given its asset, a firm's capital structure
won't influence its total market value.
The idea behind the MM theorem can also
be shown more intuitively as follows.
If the firm's asset is fixed, the total size of the pie,
so to speak-- that is, its cash flow--
is also fixed.
The capital structure is only about how to slice up
this pie into two pieces--
payoffs to debt and equity respectively.
How to slice the pie clearly won't change
the total size of the pie.
In the absence of frictions, slicing incurs no costs.
Therefore, it won't change the total value of the pie,
that is, the value of the asset, which is held constant.
This is sometimes also referred to as "the Pie Theory of MM."
What if slicing changes the total size of the pie?
Then there will be an arbitrage.
Let's think about this.
Suppose that by dividing up the firm's asset into debt
and equity, the sum of the value of debt and equity
is higher than the value of the asset.
Well, we can then buy up an asset, issue debt and equity
against it, yielding more than what we paid.
This is an arbitrage.
If instead a levered firm's debt and equity
are trading at prices that sum to be lower
than the value of its asset, we can then
buy up the debt and equity and then
form an unlevered firm, which is simply the firm's asset,
and sell it for more than the cost.
This is again an arbitrage.

Therefore, in the absence of any frictions,
slicing a pie, that is, changing the firm's financing or capital
structure, is a zero NPV activity.
It does not create value.