
PROFESSOR: Since a firm's liabilities are really
claims on its asset, we can also view a firm
as the portfolio of financial claims.
Using portfolio analytics, we have A equals D plus E.
That is, a firm as a portfolio consists
of its debt and equity.
Second, the rates of return on the firm's asset, debt,
and equity satisfy the following equation--
rA equals D divided by D plus E--
that's the relative weight of debt--
times rD plus E divided by D plus C--
that's the relative weight of equity--
times rE.
The same equation also holds for the required rates of return
on asset, debt, and equity.
A firm's cost of capital is the required rate
of return on its asset, rA.
Similarly, the firm's cost of debt and equity
are the required rates of return on its debt and equity,
given by rD and rE respectively.
From the equation above, we have the following.
A firm's cost of capital rA also equals the weighted average
of its cost of debt, rD, and its cost of equity, rE.
We therefore conclude-- when a firm is financed by both debt
and equity, its cost of capital rA
equals the Weighted Average Cost of Capital, also known as WACC,
which is given by the last equation on the slide.
That is, WACC equals D divided by D plus E times rD plus E
divided by D plus E times rE.
And that equals the relative weight
of debt times the return on debt plus the relative weight
of equity times return on equity.
The MM theorem and analysis above, although simple,
is fundamental.
It can help us to avoid various misunderstandings and fallacies
in thinking about financing.
As an example, let's consider the cheap debt fallacy.
The argument is that debt is a better source of financing,
because it is cheaper than equity.
Here are the reasons.
First, debt is safer than equity.
Therefore, investors demand a lower return
for holding debt than equity.
That is, rD is less than rE.
The average difference in the expected returns
is substantial--
6% versus 12%, as we have seen before.
Therefore, companies should always
use debt to finance their assets,
as they pay lower returns on their debt.
Is this argument correct?
Let's think it over.
It is true that debt demands a lower return.
But using debt is not free.
It has hidden costs.
In particular, using more debt will make the existing equity
riskier.
Here's how.
Given the firm's investments, rA is fixed from the WACC formula,
increasing wD, that is leverage, tends to increasing rE.
This is unrelated to default risk.
It is true even if the debt remains risk-free.
We can demonstrate this point by an example.
Assume that CAPM holds.
Suppose that beta D is 0, that is, the debt is risk-free.
We then have beta A equals wD times
beta D plus 1 minus wD times beta E. If beta D is 0,
then that should equal to 1 minus wD times beta E.
Rewriting this equation, we have beta E equals 1 over 1
minus wD times beta A. Given A, the asset, beta A is fixed.
Increasing wD will then increase beta E. From this analysis,
we see that as we sell more of the safer cash flow to debt
holders, the remaining cash flow,
which goes to equity holders, becomes riskier.
Here we need to distinguish two meanings of "cheap."
One is "low cost," which may also imply low benefit.
The other is "good deal."
Clearly, in absence of market frictions, increasing leverage
itself is not a good deal.
