
PROFESSOR: We want to further explore
the implication of leverage on the risk of equity.
We have learned that the required rates of return
on a firm's asset, debt and equity,
have the following relationship.
That is, rA equals D divided by D plus E times rD plus E
divided by D plus E times rE.
That's the weighted average of rD and rE
on the right-hand side.
Rewriting this, we have the second MM theorem.
The cost of equity of a levered firm
is given by the following equation--
rE equals rA plus D/E--
that's the debt-to-equity ratio-- times rA minus rD.
From this equation, we make the following observations.
The required rate of return on asset,
rA, is independent of D/E, the debt-to-equity ratio,
which also measures leverage.
rE increases with the debt-to-equity ratio
if debt is risk-free.
Equity becomes riskier, hence demands
a higher expected rate of return when
financial leverage increases.
rD may also increase with leverage,
as debt becomes risky.
What we want to do next is to understand a little better how
leverage changes a firm's risk.
The risk associated with a firm's asset
is referred to as its business risk,
which arises from the firm's real business activities.
When the firm's asset is kept constant, as we do now,
its business risk is also fixed.
Changes in risk only occurs for the different parts
on the liability side--
that is, equity and debt--
when we change leverage.
To see this, let's consider two firms labeled as U and L.
In particular, the two firms have the same assets.
Firm U is 100% equity-financed, that is, unlevered.
Firm L is financed by both equity and debt,
hence it's levered.
From MM II, we have the following.
First, Firm L's required rate of return on equity
is different from Firm U's. The required rate of return
of Firm U's equity compensates for its business risk,
that is, the risk of its asset.
However, for Firm L's equity, in addition to the firm's business
risk, it also involves an additional financial risk,
which arises from leverage.
Therefore, the difference between the required rates
of return on equity for Firm L and U
compensates for the financial risk in Firm L's equity.
In order to further illustrate the financial risk
in the firm's equity.
Let's assume that the CAPM holds.
Furthermore, we assume that the firm's leverage level is low
so that its debt is risk-free.
Using the market beta as the measure of systematic risk,
we have the following relationship--
beta A-- that's the beta of the asset--
equals wD, the weight of debt, times beta D plus 1 minus wD--
that gives the weight of equity--
times beta E. And that equals 1 minus wD times beta
E when beta of debt is 0.
We can also rewrite this as the beta E equals 1 over 1
minus wD times beta A.
From this equation, we observe the following.
Beta A captures the risk of the firm's asset or business, which
is independent of its financing.
Beta E minus beta A is in general different from 0.
This difference does depend on the firm's financing,
reflecting its equity's financial risk.
If D equals 0, that is, when there's no leverage,
then beta E equals beta A, and equity has no financial risk.
However, for D greater than 0, that is,
when there is leverage, we have beta E greater than beta A
when beta A is positive.
This is also true even when beta D is not 0 but small.
For beta D equals 0, that is, when debt is risk-free,
we can also rewrite the following.
Beta E equals 1 plus D/E, the debt-to-equity ratio,
times beta A. Clearly, beta E increases with D/E.
The discussion above tells us the following--
firms with similar businesses can have very different equity
betas when they have different capital structures.
The discussion above also leads to
other important implications, in particular in capital budgeting
analysis.
In absence of taxes, only the required rate
of return on asset or project is needed in capital budgeting
decisions.
As we discussed above, we typically
try to obtain this discount rate from traded assets
in the market with similar risks,
in particular, similar systematic risks.
We do so as follows.
First, we find traded firms with comparable asset or business.
Next we use the equity returns as asset returns
to estimate the asset's systematic risk level,
like the beta in the CAPM, if these firms
are 100% equity-financed.
In this case, equity equals asset.
However, this may not always happen.
In particular, trade firms may not be 100% equity-financed.
When there's leverage, we cannot naively use the return
on equity to approximate the return on asset.
Instead, we need to unlever the equity return
to obtain asset return.
We develop this procedure using an example.
Suppose that we want to obtain the cost of capital
for a privately held software business.
There are two publicly traded software companies
who have similar business risks as the one we
are interested in.
However, these two firms are financed differently.
Their capital structure and related information
are given in the table.
Firm 1 has an equity beta of 1.42, debt beta of 0.24,
and a debt-to-equity ratio of 0.5, which are given
by the second row in the table.
Firm 2 has an equity beta of 1.56, debt beta of 0.57,
and a debt-to-equity ratio of 1.2,
which are given by the third row in the table.
Clearly, the equity beta is different for the two firms,
despite the fact that they are in the same line of business
and should have the same asset beta.
This difference arises from the fact
that the two firms have very different leverage levels.
Firm 2 has a debt-to-equity ratio
of 1.2, which is a lot higher than Firm 1's
debt-to-equity ratio of 0.5.
We also notice that both firms' debt are not risk-free
and have positive betas.
Because of higher leverage, Firm 2's debt has a higher beta than
Firm 1's.
What we are interested in, however,
is the asset beta of the two firms, not the equity betas.
Using MM II for the relationship between a firm's
cost of equity, asset, and debt, and assuming the CAPM holds,
we have the following equation for these two firms' betas.
For Firm 1, we have on the left-hand side
beta E, which is 1.42 for Firm 1 equals on the right-hand side
beta A plus 0.5, which is Firm 1's debt-to-equity ratio,
times beta A minus beta D, which is 0.24 for Firm 1.
For Firm 2, we have the same equation
but with Firm 2's numbers.
Beta E on the left-hand side, which is 1.56 for Firm 2,
equals on the right-hand side beta
A plus 1.2, Firm 2's debt-to-equity ratio,
times beta A minus 0.57, which is Firm 2's debt beta.
Solving for beta A from the two equations,
we have beta A1 equals 1.03 and beta A2 equals 1.02.
The two estimates are not identical but quite close.
This makes sense, since the two companies are
in the same business and should have similar systematic risks
for their assets.
Take the average of the two estimates, and round up,
we have the estimate beta for the asset beta
A, which is 1.03.
Using CAPM with the risk-free rate of 4%
and a market premium of 8%, the cost
of capital for the software business
should be 4%, the risk-free rate, plus 1.03, the asset
beta, times 8%, the market premium, which gives 12.24%.
