
PROFESSOR: In our previous discussion,
we have learned that taking on debt
will usually increase the risk of a firm's equity.
How about the risk of debt?
Sometimes, in a discussion, for simplicity, we
assume that debt is risk-free.
Of course, in general, it's not.
Here, we will examine the risk of corporate debt
in more detail.
Corporate debt yields promised payoffs
of fixed amount at fixed times.
For this reason, it is often put in the fixed income category.
But it's important to recognize that promises are promises.
Unlike government debt, at least the good ones,
corporate debt has the risk of unable
to deliver the promised payoffs.
This risk is also called the default risk or credit
risk, which refers to the possibility
that a corporate debt fails to make the promised
payment on time, either interest or principal.
It is important to note, in legal terms,
the definition of default is any failure in delivering promised
payments on time, independent of how much in amount and in time.
We will introduce several measures
to characterize default risk.
One gauge of default risk is provided by rating agencies
in the market.
Two of the major ones are Moody's and Standard
and Poor's, or S&P. They use a letter rating
system to indicate the likelihood of default
for debt securities.
The table on the slide gives a rough description
of this rating system, the first column
lists the different grades for credit-worthiness
from high to low.
The top is gilt-edged, the highest grade, and the bottom
is low grade.
The second column lists Moody's ratings from high to low.
The highest is Aaa, the next is Aa, and single A, and then Baa,
and then Ba, and so on.
The third column is S&P's ratings, AAA, AA, and so on.
Clearly, the rating scheme between the two agencies
is quite similar.
It is also noted that the rating agencies rate
a wide range of debt instruments issued by firms, governments,
and various types of entities and financial vehicles.

Debt of different ratings is also
given two broad categories.
The investment-grade refers to debt of higher ratings, Baa
and above by Moody's or BBB and above by S&P. Speculative
or junk grade refers to debt of lower ratings, Ba
and below by Moody's, and BB and below by S&P. Again,
these ratings aim at capturing the chance of default, not
its magnitude.