
PROFESSOR: Default risk is also reflected in bond prices.
We use bond prices or yields to define several measures
of default risk.
We do so by using an example.
For simplicity, we consider only zero coupon bonds
with a par value of $1,000.
In particular, a 10-year treasury STRIPS
is trading at $463.19, yielding 8%.
A 10-year zero coupon bond issued by XYZ, Inc.
is trading at $321.97.
Since this bond has the same promised
payoff at the same time as the 10-year STRIPS,
the fact that it's trading at a lower price
simply reflects that it has substantial default risk.
The payoff from the 10-year STRIPS
is simply $1,000 for sure.
The payoff from XYZ's 10-year zero, however, is uncertain.
In the best scenario, it is $1,000.
In the worst scenario, it will be 0.
Let us assume that the average across all possible scenarios,
the expected payoff is $762.22 on the XYZ bond.
We can then define two yields to maturity
to capture XYZ's default risk.
The first is the promised yield to maturity,
which is defined by the yield to maturity
using the bond's promised payoff and its current price.
It's given by the first equation on the slide.
Take the promised payoff of $1,000 divided
by the bond price, which gives the gross return over 10 years.
Taking the 10th root and minus 1,
we have the promised yield to maturity of 12%.

The second is the expected yield to maturity.
It is defined by the yield to maturity
using the bond's expected payoff and its current price.
This is given in the second equation on the slide.
The expected yield to maturity equals the expected payoff
of $762.22 divided by the bond's current price, which
is $321.97, taking the 10th root and minus 1.
It gives 9%.
Clearly, these two yields differ from the yield to maturity
on the Treasury, which is 8%.
In fact, if we apply the same formulas to the Treasury
STRIPS, we will get 8% for both the promised yield
and the expected yield.
With the two yields defined above,
we can further define two premiums--
the default premium and the risk premium.
The default premium is given by the difference
between the promised yield to maturity
and expected yield to maturity.
For XYZ's bond, we have 12%, its promised yield,
minus 9%, its expected yield, which gives 3%.
Intuitively, this premium reflects the actual yield
the bond has to promise to compensate its default risk.
Risk premium is given by the difference
between expected yield to maturity
and the risk-free yield to maturity.
In the case of XYZ bond, we have 9% minus 8%, which is 1%.
As always, the risk premium is expected excess return
on the bond.
To summarize, we list the four variables
we have introduced to capture different aspects of default
risk.
Promised yield to maturity is the yield
if default does not occur or the promise is met.
Expected yield to maturity is the probability
weighted average of all possible yields.
Default premium is the difference between the promised
yield and expected yield.
Risk premium is the difference between the expected
yield on the risky bond and the yield
of a risk-free bond of similar maturity and coupon rate.
It's worth noting that the promised yield only
depends on the bond's promised cash
flow and its current price.
Therefore, similar to the yield to maturity
for risk-free bonds, promised yield is really a different way
to quote prices for risky bonds.
Using the numbers for the XYZ bond, the figure on the slide
illustrates the different yields and premiums
we have just introduced.
The bond's promised yield is 12%.
It can be decomposed into three components from bottom up.
In absence of default risk, we have the default-free yield,
which is 8%.
Given the default risk, there will
be a risk premium, which is 1%.
The sum of the two gives 9%, which is the expected yield.
The default premium is the actual yield
the bond has to promise to compensate the default
scenarios.
It is 3% in this example.
Adding it to the expected yield gives us
the promised yield of 12%.
This is also the highest yield we can
obtain when the promise is met.
In all other scenarios, which means default,
the yield will be lower.
The lowest yield possible is minus 100%,
which is when the payoff from the bond is 0.
What we do next is to further examine
the factors that are affecting the default premium or bond
price.
The first is the likelihood of default.
If the probability of default is 0,
the default premium will also be 0.
This factor is what the rating agencies focus on.
The second factor is the amount of financial loss when default
occurs, or more precisely, the probability distribution
of potential losses.
Let's examine these two factors and their relationship
to default premium in more detail.
We do so by using an example.
Suppose that a firm wants to issue a one-year bond
with a par value of $1,000.
It has a non-trivial default risk.
Its probability of default, denoted by p, is 6%.
In the case of default, the loss rate, denoted by lambda,
is 10%.
That is, only 1 minus lambda, which is 90% of the promised
payment, will be paid in the case of default.
1 minus lambda is also called the "recovery rate."
The expected yield by the market, denoted by y bar,
is 10% for bonds with similar default risks.
The firm wants to issue the bond at par.
The question is, what should be the coupon rate?
Since the bond is selling at par,
the promised yield is the promise coupon rate.
Let it be y.
We then have the first equation on the slide.
That is, the gross expected return or yield,
1 plus y bar, which is the left-hand side,
equals the probability of no default, which
is 1 minus p, times the promise gross yield, 1 plus y,
plus the probability of default, p,
times the gross yield in the case of default, which
is given by the recovery rate 1 minus
lambda, times the promised gross yield, 1 plus y.
Solve for y, the promised yield, we
obtain the second equation on the slide--
y equals y bar plus p times lambda divided
by 1 minus p times lambda.
Substituting numbers, we have 0.1,
which is y bar, plus 0.06--
that's the default rate--
times 0.1, which is the loss rate, and then
divide by 1 minus 0.06 times 0.1.
Finishing the calculation, we get 10.66%.
That is, the promised coupon rate
should be 10.66% in order to issue the bond at par.
In this case, the default premium is 10.66 minus 10.
And that's 0.66%, which is pretty small.
The reason is that not only the default probability is not
very high--
nearly 6% plus the recovery rate of 90%, which
is quite high, in the case of default. Therefore,
the bond's default premium is mainly
determined by its default probability and recovery rate
when defaulted.