
PROFESSOR: In the following example,
we explore further the underlying factors
influencing a bond's default risk premium.
We're looking at Cambridge International Technologies,
or CIT, which is a company in tech services.
CIT's asset has a market value of $10 billion
today, which is year 0.
And it will be $15 billion or $5 billion next year, in year 1,
with probability 2/3 and 1/3, respectively.
CIT has a one-year zero coupon bond
outstanding with a par value of $6 billion.
The current risk-free rate is 5%.
Clearly, CIT's debt is risky.
In the case of a down state next year,
its asset value of $5 billion will not
be sufficient to pay off the debt in full,
which is $6 billion.
We would like to answer the following questions--
what is the payoff of CIT's bond next year?
What is the current price of CIT's bond?
What is the current price of CIT's stock?
What is the promised yield on CIT's bond?
What is the probability of default?
And what is the loss rate when default?
What is the expected yield on CIT's bond?
What is the default premium on the bond?
And what is the risk premium on the bond?
Given the information above, we can easily
write down the payoffs on CIT's asset,
bond, and equity, which are given
in the table on the slide.
The second column gives the payoff in the good or up state,
when asset value goes up.
And the third column gives the payoff
in the bad or the down state, when asset value goes down.
The payoff of the asset is given in the third row, which
is 15 in the up state and 5 in the down state, which leads
to default. The payoff of the bond
is in the fourth row, which is 6 in up state
and 5 in a down state.
The payoff of the stock is in the last row--
9 in an up state and 0 in a down state.
In order to price the bond and the stock,
we need the state prices, phi u and phi d,
for the up and down state respectively.
From the price of CIT's asset in the risk-free rate,
we have the following equations on the slide.
The first equation is for the asset.
The price of the asset today, which is 10,
equals the sum of its value in the up and down state
multiplied by the corresponding state prices.
This gives 15 times phi u plus 5 times phi
d on the right-hand side.
The second equation is for the risk-free asset,
Assuming its payoff is $1 in year 1.
Its price, which is 1 over 1 plus 0.05
on the left-hand side, equals the sum
of the two state prices, which gives phi u plus phi d.
Solving for the two equations, we obtain the two state prices.
Phi u equals 11/21, and phi d equals 9/21.
With the above information, we can answer
all the questions listed above.
The current price of the bond and stock
is simply given by their payoffs in the two
states times the corresponding state prices.
The price of the bond D is given by 6,
which is its payoff in up state, times 11/21,
the price of the up state, plus 5 times 9/21.
That gives 111/21, which is 5.286.
The price of the stock E is a given by 9,
its payoff in the up state, times 11/21 plus 0,
its payoff in the down state, times 9/21.
That equals 99/21, which is 4.714.
These are all in billion dollars.
The promised yield on the bond, that
is, the yield when there's no default, is given by y.
That equals 6, the payoff in the no-default state,
divided by its price minus 1.
And that gives 6 over 5.286 minus 1.
And that leads to 13.5%.
The probability of default, which
occurs only in the down state, is simply 1/3.
The loss rate lambda is given by 6 minus 5
divided by 6, which is 16.7%.
The expected yield on the bond, y bar, is given by y bar
equals 2/3 times 6 plus 1/3 times 5.
That's the expected payoff on the debt divided
by its price, which is 5.286.
And minus 1, that gives us 7.2%.

The default premium of the bond is
given by the promised yield of 13.5% minus the expected yield
of 7.2%, which is 6.3%.
The risk premium of the bond is given
by its expected yield of 7.2% minus the risk-free rate
of 5%, which is 2.2%.
This example clearly shows how the price and different yields
of a risky bond are determined by its payoff
in different states, the probabilities of these states,
and the state prices.
Although we have used a simple binomial model
to illustrate these underlying connections,
as we have seen in the option pricing lecture,
more general binomial models can be
built to provide more precise valuations of corporate bonds.