
PROFESSOR: For the last part of our discussion on default
risks, let's take a look at some data
to get a better empirical perspective.
What is shown in the figure on the slide
is the time series of the promise
yields on corporate bonds with different ratings.
The x-axis is time from 1920 to June of 2020.
The y-axis gives the promised yield to maturity.
The blue line gives the yield for Moody's AAA
corporate bonds.
And the red line is for BAA bonds.
The shaded intervals are times of economic recessions.
The overall time trend for the two yields
are mostly driven by the changes in interest rates,
as we have seen in our fixed income discussion in part
one of this course.
Our interest is on the difference or the spread
between the two yields, namely the vertical distance
between the two curves.
Given that AAA bonds are almost risk-free,
this yield spread roughly reflects the default premium
of BAA bonds.
We make two observations.
First, the yield spread does change over time.
Sometimes it's quite small, less than one percentage point.
And sometimes it's quite large, more
than several percentage points.
This simply implies that the probability of default
and the recovery rate can both be
varying over time as the state of the economy evolves.
Second, during periods of economic recession,
the yield spread tends to widen, also
reflecting potential increases in default risk and loss ratio.
These results, although not unexpected,
do reflect how the market behaves
in pricing corporate bonds.
Next, we consider corporate bonds default probabilities.
For this, we use the historic data on defaults.
What's plotted in the figure on the slide
is the historic default rates for corporate bonds globally.
The x-axis is time from 1920 to 2017.
The y-axis is the percentage of bonds defaulted in each year.
The light blue line is for all corporate bonds.
And the dark blue line is for speculative grade bonds.
From the data, we make several observations.
First, bonds of speculative grade
tend to have higher default rates on average.
This also means that the ratings are informative about bonds'
default risks.
Also, the average rate of default for all bonds
is below 4%, while the average rate
of default for speculative bonds can be substantially higher.
Second, the default rates are not constant over time.
There are large time variations.
In the good years, the default rates
can be close to zero, even for junk bonds.
In the bad years, the default rate for speculative bonds
can be 6% or higher, sometimes even reaching double digits.
This is an important fact.
It suggests that default risk has
systematic components in it.
In other words, defaults are correlated across bonds.
This should not be surprising.
In good economic times, we expect the default rates
to be lower for all bonds.
In bad times, we expect the opposite.
If default risk was all idiosyncratic,
we would expect the average default rate
to be flat over time.
The plot on this site shows similar results,
that is, global default rates for all bonds--
investment grade bonds and speculative grade bonds.
The time span here is 1981 to 2019.
The dark blue line at the bottom gives the default
rates for investment grade bonds during this period.
Clearly, the default rates are generally very low.
The yellow line at the top shows the default rates
for junk grade bonds.
They are a lot higher than that of investment grade bonds.
More importantly, the default rates
vary substantially over time.
In particular, during periods of recession and stock market
correction, such as 1991, 2000, 2001, 2008,
and '09, the default rates really spike up.
This clearly demonstrates the systematic nature
of default risks.
The light blue line in the middle
gives the default rates of all bonds, which
is the average between investment
and speculative grade bonds.
Summarizing what the data reveals,
we have the following results on factors
affecting default risks.
First, most of default risks, as measured by default
probability, is idiosyncratic.
Second, a substantial part of the default risk is systematic.
That is correlated across bonds.
The systematic part of the default risk
is also related, at least partially to economic cycles.
Third, the systematic part of the default risk
may also exhibit fat tails.
How about recovery rates?
They seem to exhibit similar properties
as the default rates.