
PROFESSOR: Take a look at portfolio optimization
on the computer.
We'll take a look at some data.
We'll run some calculations of the efficient frontier.
And then, we'll compare the different versions
of constrained optimizations that we've talked about,
one of them where we use the exact closed form result where
we have equality constraints and the other using
techniques of quadratic programming
when inequality constraints are present.
So the exact results that are obtained by the Lagrangian
multiplier method work well if we've
got a fixed number of equality constraints.
But a budget constraint might have some risk constraints.
For example, we might want to have a market-neutral portfolio
where some of the market betas as measured, say, by kappas
and betas and to 0.
We might want to set an industry exposure to a particular level.
But typically, what we're doing is either
we're targeting an objective like a budget,
or we're targeting a constraint to manage risk or exposures
such as a long-short portfolio or with an industry constraint.
And those work terrifically well because we can
have any number of constraints.
There's a couple of caveats for the closed form.
Number one, we want to have more assets
or more degrees of freedom than we do constraints.
And second, the constraints generally
need to be independent of each other.
There can be degenerate cases.
And finally, the constraints need
to be consistent with each other.
It's possible to write down constraints that cannot
simultaneously be satisfied.
But usually, it's a fairly straightforward problem.
Now, when we do that for equality constraints,
there's nothing that bounds the range
of the weights in the solution.
They could be anything.
The w's that we get for a portfolio could
be any real number, and that means
they don't lie between 0 and 1 where we typically
think of the weight of capital allocation within a portfolio.
Now, we can generalize.
Certainly for negative weights, we
can think of those short positions.
They're effectively the case where a short position as we
sell some securities short and we
require bringing back that number of securities
to get to 0.
And it functions to a pretty good approximation
as treating it like a negative number.
What about w bigger than 1?
That's a levered position.
We borrow money.
Usually, we'll assume for financial assumptions we
borrow at the risk-free rate.
And we can buy more than the amount of capital
that we initially have present.
So that's OK.
But even then, there are practical real-world
limitations.
We could get to a w of 1 and 1/2, a w of 2, a w of 10
if we're highly leveraged.
We can't get to a w of 50 million.
No one's going to give you that much credit or me.
So we do want to know if things lie within a reasonable amount.
And in fact, this is true in general
of constrained problems.
We always want to know for a solution
to a constrained optimization problem,
are the constraints binding?
After all, it could be that we find
a solution that is not pinned at one edge or the other.
In the case of equality constraints,
we force them to bind.
But in the case of inequality constraints,
we might be at a maximum or you might
be somewhere in the interior region
where those constraints don't actually
come into play for the particular values,
the parameters, that we have to work with.
