
PROFESSOR: Now that we have our data, let's optimize.
So let's start with the minimum variance portfolio.
That was the simplest optimization we had.
There's only one constraint, the budget constraint.
So we have a covariance matrix, we have our expected returns
which we're going to ignore because they don't enter
into the problem, and what we'd like
to do is solve for the minimum variance portfolio.
So if we do that, remember that we had a very simple solution,
that the minimum variance portfolio is
proportional to c inverse iota.
So we're going to run this chunk of code here.
And what this does is here's c inverse times iota, and then
remember that we have it normalized
so that the weights sum to 1.
One way we could do it was by looking at the--
dividing by transpose iota inverse covariance iota,
but I like to think of this sometimes in a little bit
more practical terms.
These are weights.
They need sum to 1.
So let's sum them and normalize them
so that they sum to 1 by dividing
by the sum of the raw weights.
So we know that these are proportional first
to the inverse covariance matrix times iota.
As we said in the special cases like a diagonal covariance
matrix, it says the exposure is going
to be inversely proportional to the variance, which makes sense
at least qualitatively that the riskier an asset is,
the less exposure we're going to have.
And this is typical of the way that we
think about risk and portfolio construction,
that the amount of capital we have
isn't actually the first thing we think about.
We often think about how much risk exposure
we have because that's going to be
the basis for getting return.
And we're often, in financial institutions, not necessarily
constrained by our budget because we can borrow.
We can use the balance sheet of an organization perhaps.
We still need to be accountable for our capital usage.
But when it comes to looking at potential investments,
we want to make sure that we get a high return per unit of risk,
not just a high return per unit of capital, which would not
distinguish between the return on two investments
a very different risk.
Now, the other interesting portfolio
we might as well plot while we're here,
which is the portfolio of maximum Sharpe ratio, which
is c inverse times mu.
And what we saw in solving the problem where
we had both a budget constraint and an expected return
constraint was that any portfolio
in the efficient frontier could be written
as a linear combination of two portfolios,
sometimes called characteristic portfolios.
One of them was the global minimum variance portfolio,
and it's associated with this particular vector
iota, a vector of 1's that corresponds to the budget
constraint.
The other one is associated with the vector
of expected excess returns, and that's
c inverse mu or it's a portfolio proportional to c inverse mu.
So by taking linear combinations of those two portfolios,
we can reach everything on the efficient frontier.
So we solve for them.
What do we get?
We get a bunch of numbers, and here are the numbers.
So we've got a column vector, and we can look up
which assets are which.
But it's pretty clear that these numbers are unconstrained.
Some of the numbers here are negative.
They correspond to short positions.
Some of them are big.
They correspond to long positions.
Take a look at the bottom two columns that we have here.
These were the ones of France and Japan,
and this says the optimal thing to do
is to go short one of them 60%, a huge position,
and go long the other one 1.7 and similar kinds of numbers
for both of these.
So these are very, very big numbers.
They're not the kinds of things a typically prudent asset
allocator would do, even though here they're optimal.
This looks like extremely large positions,
very large short positions, very highly levered long positions.

We can also look at a bar plot.
Taking a look just at rank order is often
a helpful overview for a portfolio
just to see where things stand.
And if we look for this portfolio,
you see, say, for the mu portfolio.
You can do the same thing for the iota portfolio.
We see that the weights to go from negative to positive
and that most of the weights in the middle
actually are not going to have as big an influence as two
gigantic weights on the top and the bottom.
