
PROFESSOR: So this is our traditional risk return
plot where we have risk on the x-axis, excess return
on the y-axis, and we can see what's efficient.
We can plot any portfolio on this graph,
see how far it is from the efficient frontier.
But one thing that we don't have insight into
is how to reverse the mapping.
After all, the portfolios here are
in an eight-dimensional space.
What do those portfolios look like?
What are the portfolios on the efficient frontier?
The red dots are basis vectors.
Those are basic vectors, the direction of one
of the assets projected down to this two-dimensional space.
Can we see what's going on as we move
along the efficient frontier?
Sure we can.
We've already solved that.
That was one of the outputs of the optimizer.
So let's take a look at running the next chunk of code,
which is down here.
And what we're going to do is let's run this and take a look
at a plot.
And what we're doing here is we're looking at a stacked bar
plot because remember that the weights go between 0 and 1.
So when we have short weights, a stacked bar plot
is a terrible idea.
But when the weights have to be between 0 and 1,
it's a terrific idea because they add up to 1,
and we have a good idea as to what the portfolio balance is.
So what we're looking at is that as we move along
the efficient frontier from our lowest return
up to the highest return, we're asking what the portfolio
composition looks like.
What we see on the left-hand side of the picture
is that we start with US bonds.
If you want to have really low risk,
you don't have any choice.
There's just no room in the portfolio.
For anything risky, it's going to dominate.
As we start increasing, we get more and more--
we go from the bonds.
Pretty quickly, we go to euros, so we
get a little bit more return.
And that gradually decreases as those
get crowded out as we move our way
along the efficient frontier.
What's growing?
Well, take a look at US assets on the bottom.
They're growing.
So look at this again in vertical slices.
As we move from left to right, we see that the US is growing.
We see that Japan and France and all the countries
are growing in different slices in different wedges.
So as we move up the efficient frontier,
we're having more risky assets, fewer riskless assets.
And the reason we see some common things and these looks
somewhat proportional is precisely because of the nature
that we saw that when we're--
that this is driven by certain linear combinations that
work for balancing what the risk and return are,
the kind of thing we saw in the unconstrained case.
But then we hit a turning point.
So as we keep moving up and as the return level gets higher,
we finally need return that we just
can't get except by being completely in the risky assets.
So when we get up about 80% of the way across this graph,
what we see is there's no more room even for euros,
and we see that the riskiest assets are dominating.
In this case, it's France and Japan
because those are the two that have the highest return.
So when we're at the far right-hand side of the graph,
we're dominated by return.
We have to invest in the riskiest assets.
Otherwise, there's no way to satisfy the constraint--
or excuse me, not necessarily the riskiest
in the highest return assets.
In this case, we have two of them
because they're very, very closely connected
in terms of their risk and return for where they sit.
So the portfolio is including both of them
instead of taking opposite positions
as it did when the weights were completely unconstrained here.
Because the weights have to be positive,
it's looking for a little bit of correlation offset.
But there we go.
So this is interpolating between the lowest return, lowest risk
side and the highest return side of the efficient frontier.