PROFESSOR: Finally, let's review the last problem, Problem 3.
Problem 3 states that you are a manager
of a hedge fund that specializes in the fixed income market.
The fund's portfolio currently consists
of these three positions in which all yields are
bond equivalent yields, which, if you recall from Problem 1,
are annual yields that assume semi-annual coupon payments.
The first position is a short position
in $150,000 face value of a 7-year 2.8% coupon
bond with semi-annual coupon payments
that is priced to yield 3.95%.
The second position is a long position
in $350,000 face value of a 3-year 2.25% coupon
bond with, again, semi-annual payments
but is now priced to yield 2.75%.
The third and final position is a long position in $425,000
face value of a 14-year 4.6% coupon
bond with semi-annual payments and is priced to yield 4.125%.
As a portfolio manager, you decide
to delta-hedge the interest rate exposure of your fund's
portfolio using a 3-year interest rate swap.
The swap specifies a semi-annual exchange of 6-month LIBOR
for a fixed payment of 3.5%, paid semi-annually.
That is a fixed payment of 1.75% every 6 months.
The current 6-month LIBOR rate is 1.4%.
As a warm-up, Part A simply asks whether we
would want to be a fixed or a floating rate
payor in the swap?
Well, you don't actually have to do any calculations to answer
this question.
It's pretty clear from the sizes of our long positions
and short positions that on net, we
will be receiving fixed payments from our portfolio.
In other words, we are long duration
and in order to delta-hedge the interest rate
risk to our fund's equity, we want
to be a fixed rate payor, equivalently, a floating rate
receiver in the swap.

Now, let's assume that you calculate
the dollar duration of your portfolio to be $4,743,387.
Part B is simply asking--
what would be the notional principal
of the swap, in which we are a fixed rate payor, that
delta-hedges our portfolio?
The first thing to recall here is that an interest rate swap
is equivalent to a long position in a fixed rate bond,
in a short position in a floating rate bond,
or vice versa, depending on whether or not
we are a fixed rate payor or a floating rate
payor in the swap.
Both positions, the long position
and the short position, are initially priced at par.
To find the notional principal of the swap,
we first need to find the modified
durations of the fixed and floating legs of the swap.
To find the modified duration of the fixed leg of the swap,
we can use the convexity.xls calculator
that we used in Problem 1.
Recall that the problem statement
says that the swap specifies a semi-annual exchange
of 6-month LIBOR for a fixed payment of 3.5% paid
semi-annually.
Thus, in our convexity.xls calculator,
we can substitute in the appropriate parameters
for a semi-annual fixed payment of 3.5% and three years
to maturity, and find that the modified
duration of the fixed leg of the swap is 2.8245 years.
What about the modified duration of the floating
leg of the swap?
Well recall, called that the Macaulay duration
of the floating leg of the swap is
equal to the time to the next reset.
In this case, since there are 6 months until the next reset,
the Macaulay duration will be, in years, 0.5.
Thus, the modified duration of the floating leg of the swap
is equal to 0.5 divided by 1 plus 0.014,
which is the current 6-month LIBOR
rate of 1.4%, divided by 2 to express it as a 6-month rate.
That equals 0.4965 years, which is
the modified duration of the floating leg of the swap.
The last step, in order to find the notional principal
of the swap, is to equate the hedge ratios, or dollar
durations, of our portfolio with that of the swap.
In the equation shown, the left-hand side
is the hedge ratio, or dollar duration
of our portfolio, which was given to be $4,743,387.
The hedge ratio, or dollar duration, of our swap
is equal to the notional principal
of the swap in dollars--
which I denoted by S--
times the difference between the modified duration
of the fixed leg of the swap and the modified duration
of the floating leg of the swap.
It's fixed minus floating here because, as in Part A,
we determined that we wanted to be a fixed rate
payor, equivalently a floating rate receiver, in the swap.
Solving for S, you should find that the notional principal
of the swap is $2,037,560.
Well, that's it for Problem 3.
Thank you for attending this week's recitation.
And I look forward to seeing all of you next week.