
J. R. SCOTT: Hello everyone and welcome to the third recitation
of 15.435x.
In this recitation, we'll be reviewing
three problems related to duration, convexity, and delta
hedging.
Without further ado, let's begin with problem 1.
Problem 1 asks us to consider a 2-year bond with a coupon
rate of 4%, annual payments, and is
priced at $98 per $100 face value
for an effective annual yield of 5.077%.
In Part A, we are asked to calculate the modified
duration of this bond.
Sounds easy, right?
Well, the first thing to notice here
is that the yield we are given is an effective annual yield.
What does that mean?
A bond's effective annual yield is a simple interest rate
earned on the bond over a year, taking into account all
compounding opportunities.
In order to use the convexity calculator provided
by Professor Lucas to find the bond's modified duration,
we first need to convert this effective annual yield, or EAY,
into a bond equivalent yield.
A bond equivalent yield is the single interest rate
that equates the price of a bond to the present value
of its future cash flows, assuming
semi-annual compounding.
This is the most frequent notation in which
you will see yields quoted.
Now, the simple conversion for an effective annual yield
into a bond equivalent yield is to use
the formula in equation 1.
In particular, the effective annual yield
is equal to 1 plus the bond equivalent yield divided
by 2 squared minus 1, where y subscript
ea is the effective annual yield,
and y subscript be is the bond equivalent yield.
Plugging in 5.077% for the effective annual yield
into equation 1, we can solve for the bond equivalent yield
to be 5.014%--
close, but slightly smaller than the effective annual yield.
Now, given that we have the bond equivalent yield,
we can find the modified duration of the bond
by inputting the following parameters
into the convexity.xls calculator.
In particular, N, which is the maturity in years of the bond,
is set to be 2.
The frequency for the coupon payments
is set to be 1, since we have annual coupon payments.
The coupon rate is 4%.
The face value of the bond at maturity
we will normalize to be $100, and the yield on the bond
equivalent basis is 5.014%.
When you calculate both the convexity and the duration,
you'll find that the Macaulay duration is 1.96 years,
and the modified duration, which is what this question was
asking us, is 1.866 years.
In Part B, we are asked to use the modified duration
that we calculated in part a to estimate
the new price of the bond if the bond's effective annual yield
increases to 6.5%.
Do you expect the actual price of the bond
to be higher or lower than your estimate here?

The first thing we need to do is to recall
that we can approximate the dollar price
change in a bond for a given change in its yield using
the following expression, which I have numbered equation 2.
On the left-hand side, dP is the change in the price of a bond.
On the right-hand side, DM is the modified duration
of the bond, P is the bond's price,
and dy is the change in the yield of a bond.
Effectively, this approximation relates
the change in the price of the bond to its modified duration.
Now, plugging in the modified duration of 1.866 years
for the bond that we calculated in Part A,
the change in the yield of 6.5% minus 5.077%,
which is equal to 1.423%, and the bond's price of $98,
we see that dP, the change in the bond's price is negative
$2.60.
In other words, the new price of the bond after the increase
in yield is $95.40.
Now, do we expect the actual change in the bond's price
to be higher or lower than the one obtained
using the approximation in equation 2?
Recall that we can improve our approximation
by including the impact of convexity, that
is, the second derivative of a bond's price with respect
to its yield.
The approximation that includes both duration and convexity
can be written as follows in equation 3.
This equation is very similar to equation 2.
Notice that the first term on the right-hand side is the same
as that is in equation 2 but now we have this an additional term
--
this convexity term, which is equal to 1/2 times the bond's
convexity, which I denote by C sub 0,
times the bond's price, times the square
of the change in yield, dy.
Since a long position in a non-callable bond,
like the one in this example, has positive convexity,
the second term on the right-hand side
will be positive, and the actual change in price
will be lower than the one obtained
using the approximation in equation 2
that includes only duration.
More generally, positive convexity
means that duration will underestimate
the price increase that results from a drop in the yield
and overestimate the price decrease
from an increase in the yield.
In the last part, Part C, we are asked
to imagine that we want to immunize a liability that
comes due in 3 and 1/2 years.
If you want to invest in an immunizing portfolio that
consists of both the 2-year coupon bond in part a
and one of the following three bonds,
which bond would you choose?
Now, assume here that all coupons are paid annually.
The first option is a 3.5-year, 6.25% coupon bond with
an effective annual yield of 5.5%.
The second option is a 10-year, 3.9% coupon
bond with an effective annual yield of 4.9%.
And the third option is a 3.5-year,
zero coupon bond with an effective annual yield
of 4.65%.
First, what is immunization?
Well, immunization is the procedure
of matching the durations of our assets
and our liabilities in order to minimize interest rate
risk, fluctuations in prices that come from changes
in interest rates over time.
The question is asking us, which bond
should we choose to combine with our 2-year bond
in order to immunize our liability that
has a duration of 3.5 years?
In other words, which combination of the 2-year bond
and one of these three bonds will have a duration that
approximately matches the 3.5-year duration
of our liability?
Well, using the same convexity.xls calculator
that we used in Part A, we can find the modified durations
of each of the three bonds to be,
for the first bond, 3.24 years, for the second bond, 8 years,
and for the third bond 3.34 years.
The first thing to notice right off the bat is that
the 3.5-year coupon bond is not suitable for our immunization
portfolio because it has a modified duration of less than
3.5 years, such that any combination with the 2-year
coupon bond, which itself has a modified duration of 1.866
years, would have too short a duration to immunize
our liability.
The second thing to notice is that the 3.5-year zero coupon
bond is feasible but almost all of our immunizing portfolio
would have to be invested in this bond.
Why?
Well, we know that the Macaulay duration of a zero coupon bond
is equal to its time to maturity, or in this case, 3.5
years.
Well, that exactly matches the duration of our liability
that we're trying to immunize, which means that almost 100%
of our portfolio would have to be invested in the zero coupon
bond.
A better option is a combination of our 2-year and 10-year
coupon bond.
For suitable portfolio shares, it not only
immunizes our liability, but it'll also
have a higher yield and higher convexity than an immunizing
portfolio that includes the 3.5 year zero coupon bond.
Intuitively, the way that we know that it has a higher
convexity is to realize that the payoffs of this 2-year
and 10-year portfolio are more spread out, like a barbell,
than the bullet payoff of a simple 3.5-year zero coupon
bond.
