
PROFESSOR: In this video I will show you
how to construct replicating portfolios
from known option prices.
Recall that last week we did the opposite.
Namely, we priced options by using replicating portfolios.
In practice however, pricing by replication
is impractical and often infeasible.
But many practitioners often need
to construct replicating portfolios
for hedging or speculating reasons.
And that's what we will cover now.
We will work with the lookback option
that we covered in question one.
And we will construct the following replicating
portfolios: a portfolio at time 0, which
replicates the payoff from the option of time 1,
a portfolio at time 1 in the up node, which replicates
the payoff from this option at time 2,
and a portfolio at time 1 in the down node
that replicates the payoff from this option at time 2.
We will assume that the stock price evolution
is the same as in question one.
Suppose that the replicating portfolio has
delta shares of the stock and b dollars
invested in the riskless bond.
Recall the following expressions for delta and b
and let's apply them to our case.
Let's start in year 0.
I will denote replicating portfolio in year 0
by delta naught and b naught.
Using numbers from question one, we
obtain the following values for delta and b.
This implies that to replicate these options payoff in
year one, we need to buy 0.4262 shares of the stock
and borrow 22.396 dollars at the risk-free rate.
Note that the price of this replicating portfolio
equals $20.23, which matches exactly the price of the option
that we found in question one.
Now, let's repeat the same steps and find replicating portfolio
in year one in the up node.
I will denote delta and b of this portfolio's delta 1u
and b1u.
One stands for year one, u stands for up node.
The delta would equal to 1 and the b
would equal to negative 95.238.
We can also verify that the price
of this replicating portfolio in year one in the up node
matches exactly the option price that we
found using risk neutral pricing approach
in the previous question.
Finally, we can find replicating portfolio
in year one in the down node.
Delta of this portfolio equals to 0.556
and b equals to negative 33.862.
We can also verify that the price
of this replicating portfolio in year one in the down node
matches the option price in this node found in question one.
This is a summary of replicating portfolios that we constructed.
First is the replicating portfolio in year zero.
Second is the replicating portfolio
in year one in the up node.
And third is the replicating portfolio
in year one in the down node.
