
PROFESSOR: In this video we will learn
how to use state prices to price options.
We will work with the same European lookback option
that we covered in the previous videos.
This option allows you to buy a stock two years from now
for the lowest price of the stock during the coming two
years.
We will assume that the stock price follows the same price
pattern.
The stock does not pay dividends.
We will assume that the risk-free rate is 5%, quoted
as an effective annual rate.
And we will also assume that there is no arbitrage
and that investors can borrow and lend
at this risk-free rate.
First, let's compute state prices.
The price of the up state in year one
equals to the risk-neutral probability
of the up state, qu divided by 1 plus r, where r
is the risk-free interest rate.
The price of the down state in year one
equals to the risk-neutral probability of the down state,
qd divided by 1 plus r.
Similarly, the price of uu state in year two
equals to the risk-neutral probability
of moving up squared divided by 1 plus r squared.
The state prices of states ud and du
would be the same in year two and they would
equal to qu multiplied by qd.
These are the risk-neutral probabilities
of up and down moves respectively,
divided by 1 plus r squared.
And finally, the state price of dd state
is qd squared divided by 1 plus r squared.
On this graph we summarize state prices in this economy.
Now that we know state prices, we
can price any security in this economy,
including our lookback option.
Let's first price this option in year one in the up state.
Its price equals phi u, which is the one year price of the up
state multiplied by the option payoff
in the up up state, plus phi d, which is the one year
price of the down state multiplied by the option
payoff in the up down state.
Note that we're using state prices one year ahead
because this option pays off in year two
and we're pricing it in year one.
Similarly, we can price this option in year one
in the down state.
Note that prices of this option in year
one in the up and down state, $29.76 and $10.58,
match exactly what we had when we
were pricing this option using risk-neutral pricing approach.
Finally, to find the current price
of this option we are using year zero
state prices of all four possible states in year two.
So the option price equals phi uu multiplied by the option
payoff in the up up state, which is $56.25, plus phi
ud multiplied by the payoff from the option in the up
down state, which is 0, plus phi du multiplied by the option
payoff in the down up state, which
is $20, plus phi dd multiplied by the option payoff
in the down down state, which is 0.
We see that the current price of this option
is equal $20.23, which again matches
what we had when we priced this option using
risk-neutral pricing approach.
Finally, for illustrative purposes,
we can also price the stock using state prices.
Conceptually, we have used future expected stock prices
to compute state prices.
Therefore, if we didn't make a mistake,
we should get that the current stock price is equal to $100.
I will use stock prices in year two
and year zero state prices of all four states in year two
to compute the current stock price.
We see that the price of the stock is indeed $100.
This again illustrates that once we know state prices,
we can easily price any financial instrument.