
PROFESSOR: In this video, we will
cover option price sensitivity as a function of the underlying
stock price.
Suppose that all assumptions of the Black-Scholes-Merton model
hold.
There is a stock, XYZ, with the current share price of $50.
Suppose that it has annual volatility of 35%.
The annualized continuously compounded risk-free rate
is 1.25%.
Consider a put option with the strike price of $55
and six months to maturity.
First, we will construct a replicating portfolio
for this put option.
Second, we will assume that the stock price decreases to $47.
We will compute the change in the option price
and the change in the value of the replicating portfolio.
And finally, we will assume that the stock price increases
to $53, and we will also compute the change in the option price,
as well as the change in the value
of the replicating portfolio.
Let us start by building a replicating portfolio
for this put option.
First, recall that replicating portfolio
for the call option in the context
of the Black-Scholes-Merton model is as follows.
We are buying N of X shares of the stock,
and we are borrowing the following amount dollars
at the risk-free rate.
Now, what is the replicating portfolio for the put option?
First, recall that we can price the put option
by using the put call parity.
So let's plug the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
for the value of the call option into the put call parity
equation.
We get the following equation.
And after rearranging terms, we can express the price
of the put option as follows.
Recall that N is the cumulative distribution
function of the standard normal distribution, which
means that N of x is always less than 1,
which in turn means that the terms highlighted
on the slide in red in parentheses,
1 minus N of X and 1 minus N of X minus sigma
multiplied by square root of T are positive.
Therefore, to replicate the put option, we need to short 1
minus N of X shares of the stock,
and we need to invest the following amount of dollars
at the risk-free rate.
Let's construct replicating portfolio for our option.
Recall that we already priced it in the previous video,
and its price was $7.81.
To replicate this option, we need
to short the following amount of the underlying stock,
and we need to invest $37.48 at the risk-free rate.
I computed both of these values based on the option parameters
that are given to us.
By construction, the value of this replicating portfolio
matches the value of the option.
Let's see what happens to the value of the option
and the value of the replicating portfolio
when we change the stock price.
I have copied the original price of the put option
here, so that it doesn't change when I change the stock price.
And I created a new field here for the new price
which will change when I change the stock price.
So when the stock price drops from $50 to $47,
the original price, of course, stays the same.
The new price increases to $9.73.
Therefore, the price change is $1.92,
which is the difference between the new price
and the original price.
Now, let's see what happens to the value
of the replicating portfolio.
So first, notice that I changed these two cells
into the values and not the formula,
so that the replicating portfolio that we constructed
before does not change when I change the share price.
But the value of the portfolio will
change, because it depends on these parameters
of the portfolio, but it will take into account the new share
price.
So when the share price drops to $47,
the value of the replicating portfolio increases to $9.59
from the original value of $7.81.
So therefore, the value of the portfolio
increases by $1.78, which, again, is just
the difference between the new value of the portfolio
minus the original value.
We can make one important conclusion so far.
When the share price drops from $50 to $47,
the value of the put option increases more than the value
of the replicating portfolio, so $1.92 versus $1.78.
Let's see what happens when the share price increases to $53.
In this case, the option price decreases by $1.64,
and the value of the replicating portfolio decreases by $1.78.
Let's summarize our results.
They're highlighted here in yellow.
We see that the value of the replicating portfolio
does not increase as much as the option value
when the stock price declines.
On the other hand, the value of replicating portfolio
decreases more than the value of the option
when the stock price increases.
The reason behind this result is that the value
of the put option, as shown on this graph,
is a convex function of the stock price.
In other words, it has a positive gamma,
similar to the call option, which we illustrated
in the previous video.
On the other hand, the value of our replicating portfolio
is a simple linear function of the underlying stock price.
Therefore, when the stock price increases,
the value of replicating portfolio overshoots.
And when the stock price decreases, it undershoots.