
PROFESSOR: In this video we will learn
how to use Black-Scholes-Merton formula to price options.
We will assume that all assumptions that
underlie Black-Scholes-Merton formula hold.
Suppose that there is a stock, XYZ,
with the current price of $50.
We will assume that it has annual volatility of 35%.
The annualized continuously-compounded
risk-free rate is 1.25%.
The first question asks, what is the price
of the call option with a strike price of $55
and six months to maturity?
The second question asks us to price the put option
of the same strike price, $55, and same time
to maturity, six months.
The Black-Scholes-Merton pricing formula
for a European call option is given
by the following expression.
Here S naught is the current share price,
N is the cumulative distribution function
of a standard normal distribution.
K is the strike price of the option,
R is the continuously compounded risk-free interest rate.
Sigma is the annualized volatility of the stock price,
and T is time to maturity expressed in years.
Recall that in our case option has six months to maturity,
therefore capital T is 0.5.
Let's use Excel to implement the pricing of this option.
Here I have put all of the inputs
into the problem, the current share price, volatility,
risk-free interest rate, strike price, and maturity.
Let's start by computing X. Recall that X is given
by the following expression.
Therefore, to compute X, we need to carefully input
all of the option parameters into the corresponding formula,
which I have done here.

Next, I will compute N of X. Recall
that N is the cumulative distribution
function of a standard normal distribution.
Excel has a corresponding function,
which is called NORM.S.DIST.
And it has two input parameters.
First is X and second can take values either 1 or 0.
1 is for the cumulative distribution function,
and 0 is the probability density function.
So we need the first one, so therefore the second parameter
is 1.
And that gives me N of X.
Next, I will compute the second expression, which
is N of X minus sigma multiplied by the square root
of capital T. So NORM.S.DIST, X minus sigma
multiplied by the square root of capital T. Recall
that we want cumulative distribution function,
therefore our second parameter is 1.
Now we can compute the option price.
According to the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
it equals the current share price
multiplied by N of X minus the present value of the strike
price.
Recall that the strike price is $55.
We're finding the present value of this strike price
by multiplying it by the exponent raised
to the power negative risk-free rate multiplied by capital T.
And then we're multiplying it by N
of X minus sigma multiplied by square root of T,
which is this expression.
The price of this European call option
according to the Black-Scholes-Merton formula
is $3.15.
We can extend our analysis and use
the Black-Scholes-Merton formula to see
how the option price changes with respect to underlying
parameters.
Let's see how the option price changes with respect
to the stock price.
Recall that our original stock price was $50.
Here I have created an array from $20 to $100 in $0.50
increments.
And what I will do is that for each of these stock prices,
I will compute the option price according to the Black-Scholes
formula.
Now we can plot option price as a function of stock price.
We can confirm that the option price
increases with stock price.
The slope of this line, which is the delta of this option,
starts at 0 and gets closer to 1 as stock price rises.
You can also see that this function is convex, which
means that the gamma of the call option,
defined as the second derivative of the option price
with respect to the stock price, is positive.
You can try building similar plots for time
to maturity and volatility, which
will help you to visualize theta and vega of the call option.