
PROFESSOR: In this video, I will show
an example of risk-neutral pricing approach applied
to exotic options.
Suppose that there is a stock with a current price of $100.
The graph below shows the evolution of the share
price over the next two years.
In year 1, the share price can grow
to $125, after which it can grow to $156.25
or can go down back to $100.
Alternatively, in year 1, the stock price
can go down to $80, after which it can grow to $100
or go down to $64.
We will assume that the stock does not pay dividends.
The risk-free rate, quoted as an effective annual rate, is 5%.
We will also assume that there is no arbitrage
and that investors can borrow and lend
at this risk-free rate.
Consider an exotic option called a European lookback
option, which allows you to buy a stock two years from now
for the lowest price of the stock
during the coming two years.
Effectively, this option allows you
to time the market perfectly and get the stock at the best
price.
In a controversial practice, many firms
used to grant the executive officers lookback options.
This is an example of an article from the Wall Street Journal
that discusses this practice.
We will price this European lookback option
by using the risk-neutral pricing approach.
Let us start by creating a tree with the option
payoffs in different states.
Recall that in the up-up state, the share price is $156.25.
The lookback option allows you to buy this share at the lowest
price during the last two years, which was $100 in year 0.
Therefore, your payoff from this lookback option is $56.25.
In the up-down state, denoted here as ud,
the share price is $100.
And therefore, the payoff from the lookback option is $0.
In the down-up node, the option payoff is $20.
Recall that the share price in this node is $100.
But the share price in the down node in year 1 was $80.
And therefore, this option allows
you to buy a share of the stock for $80.
Hence, your payoff is $20.
Finally, in the down-down node, the share price is $64.
The option allows you to buy the share at $64.
Your payoff is $0.
Notice that the value of this option is path-dependent.
Even though in nodes ud and du the share price is $100,
the payoff and the value of the option in the node ud is $0.
But in the node du, it is $20.
This is the summary of the optimal exercise.
In nodes uu and du, the lookback option gets exercised.
And in the nodes ud and dd, the lookback option
does not get exercised.
Now that we know option payoffs, the next step
is to find risk-neutral probabilities
of the up and down moves.
First, let's find multiples u and d
by which the price either goes up or down each year.
The multiple u will be 1.25, which
is the share price in year 1, $125, divided by $100.
And the down multiple, d, would be 0.8.
Again, we get it by dividing sd by S0.
We can verify that stock prices in year 2
are consistent with these multiples u and d.

By definition, the risk-neutral probability of the up move
will be 1 plus r, which is the risk-free rate, minus d divided
by u minus d, which gives us 0.556.
Similarly, the risk-neutral probability of the down move
is u minus 1 plus r divided by u minus d, which gives us 0.44.
Notice that by definition, risk-neutral probabilities
of the up and down moves add up to 1.
Knowing risk-neutral probabilities,
we can proceed with pricing this option.
I will start pricing it in year 1 in the up node.
Price equals the risk-neutral probability
of the up move multiplied by the option payoff in the state uu
plus the risk-neutral probability of the down move
multiplied by the option payoff in the state ud divided
by 1 plus risk-free rate r.
Plugging in the numbers, we get option price in the state
u in year 1 equal to $29.76.
We can repeat the process and find the option price in year 1
in the down state, which would equal to $10.58.
Finally, we can find the option price in year 0.
It was equal to qu multiplied by cu,
which is the price of the option in year 1 in the up
node, plus qd multiplied by cd, which is the option
price in year 1 in the down node, divided by 1
plus r, which is the risk-free rate.
Plugging in the numbers, we'll get $20.23.
Importantly, the risk-neutral pricing approach
allows us to price this option in year 0
directly from payoffs in year 2.
The price of the option in year 0
equals qu squared, which is the probability of getting
to state uu multiplied by the payoff
from the option in that state, plus the probability
of getting to state ud, which is qu times qd multiplied
by the corresponding option payoff,
plus the probability of getting to state
du, which is qd times qu multiplied, again,
by the payoff from the option in that state,
plus qd squared multiplied by the option payoff in the state
dd.
The numerator in this expression is the expected payoff
from this option in year 2 under the risk-neutral probabilities
q.
To find the present value of this expected payoff,
we're discounting it to present at the risk-free rate, r.
Plugging in the numbers, we see that the price of this option
in year 0 is equal to $20.23.
