PROFESSOR: Let's take a look at Ito processes and Ito's lemma.
Let's do a few examples.
So an Ito process has two parts.
It has a deterministic part and a random part.
And of course, random part is the one
that we're particularly interested in.
This is directly analogous to what we did when
we looked at discrete time.
If we think about our old friend the generalized random walk,
we had a term r, which represented
the change, the difference in variables,
in this case, logarithms and prices,
over a particular interval.
That's going to be one way you can think about dx.
The next term, mu, was just a constant.
It was something by which in every period r would increase.
The same kind of thing with the term adt.
We think of it as being a deterministic term.
And in fact, if a were a constant mu,
and we were to integrate this over a time interval of length
1, we would see that we'd get the same result.
We would just get a constant.
And then the last term has two parts, a little b and a big B.
The big dB plays the role of our standardized random variable
Z. That is, it has zero mean instead of unit variance.
Because it's an infinitesimal, it has the next best thing.
It has variance dt.
And the coefficient function in front of it, little b,
plays the same role as sigma.
The difference is that our coefficient functions a and b,
might just be that.
They might be functions.
So a and b can be functions of t and of x itself, all right?
So we do have that a can be a function in general of t and x.
And b could be a function of t and x as well.
But certainly, the special cases where little a and little b
are constant, are going to be interesting.
Now the question that we ask in applying
Ito's lemma is, suppose I'm given an Ito process dx,
and I have some function of x.
What's its differential?
If it were an ordinary function, an ordinary deterministic
function, then the answer would be given by the chain rule.
And if you don't remember the chain rule,
now would be an excellent time to go brush up
because we're going to be using it a lot.
And what I want you to focus on are the differences
between the ordinary chain rule and the Ito rule.
So the first two terms tell us for a function of t and x
how differentials behave.
They depend on the evolution with respect
to time, the partial derivative with respect
to time times dt plus the partial with respect to x times
dx.
And this piece over here is genuinely new.
And that's going to be the source
of a lot of the interesting things
that we'll see when we look at continuous time finance.
Our strategy is going to be the same
though, that we saw in looking at time series models,
namely, to build complex models and interesting phenomenon
relationships out of very simple building blocks.
So our simple building block here, is going to be dB.
That's it.
So we want to know the properties of dB,
either in differential or integral form.
And we're going to be combining those in different ways
and solving some interesting financial problems.
So the idea is that economic variables of interest,
like a stock price, like an interest rate,
like a yield or a wide variety of other variables,
will be described by stochastic processes that can be built out
of Brownian motion, who is in infinitesimal form, our dB.
Then we're going to apply our usual tools, which we linearity
expectations plus a new tool, Ito's lemma,
for evaluating functions for looking at changes in variable
to get interesting results.

Now in general, our goal is going
to be to apply Ito's lemma to functions of the form F of t
and x, and--
sorry, let's scrawl that up slightly.
So we're going to apply Ito's lemma
to things that are of the form function of t
and a function of x.
In the classic case, and one will be thinking most about--
it's going to be the case of pricing derivative securities.
So a derivative security is a security
whose value depends on, is derived from,
the value of something else.
So the classic example would be a stock option,
where x would be the stock price or possibly
the logarithm of the stock price,
but x is related to the value of the underlying,
t is ordinary time, and F is the value
of the derivative security.
And what Ito's lemma tells us is,
how changes in the value of the underlying
translate into changes in the value
of the derivative security.
We'll look at this as we do often
in differential equations, by taking
what happened that infinitesimal time,
and then solving for what happens in the general case
as we apply boundary conditions.
So, what I'd like to do now is give a few examples,
where we can just use some of the basic calculus
and get used to computing Ito differentials.
And there are a few things I'd like you to pay attention to.
The first one is to look at the structure.
So the basic structure of an Ito process
is that, in an Ito process, it's always
of the form for an Ito process that we have--
an Ito process is something times dt
plus something else times dB.
And we might need to massage things
or move some terms around, or regroup or rewrite things.
But if we can do that, then we'll be all set.
That means that it's an Ito process.
And the reason that Ito processes
are interesting as a class is that, Ito's lemma tells us
that the differential of an Ito process
is itself an Ito process.
So that's what's going to be helpful.
So what we want to do is, we want to look at the structure
that we have, in terms of the different differentials.
We want to keep in mind which pieces are stochastic
and which pieces are deterministic,
which pieces are functions of time only,
so they can evolve in time but in a non-random way.
We want to see which things depend on what.
Are there functions that are constant?
Do they depend on t?
Do they depend on B?
Do they depend on both?
If I'm computing differentials, notice
that in the formula for dF, that I have b, appears here,
but a doesn't appear at all.
So does that mean the dF is independent of a?
Well certainly not independent of b.
So when I've written little a and little b, remember,
those are just the coefficients of these things.
So we'll use different variables,
I'll take different forms.
I might even re-use letters a and b from time to time.
But in this formula, in Ito's formula,
this b squared means the coefficient
of whatever is in the defining formula for dx,
which is the variable with respect to which we're
differentiating.
So does this mean that dF is independent of a?
Well, it looks like it in this form,
but not really, because remember,
this expression, which is a standard form Ito's lemma,
contains a dx.
So then this term is a dt, this term is a dt.
We could group them together.
The reason it's often written like this is so that we can
say, chain rule plus new guy.
But in addition to that, we do have dx,
which I could substitute in.
It has a dt and a dB.
And that of course, contains a.
So even though the a isn't explicitly visible,
we might think of it as being there.
And you'll want to keep an eye on these
because they'll show up in interesting ways
in different applications, whether things are explicitly
visible or implicit in the language,
or whether they're gone entirely.