PROFESSOR: Here's our first exercise.
Suppose I have a function, which is just a function of t and B
explicitly.
And it's t cubed plus B cubed.
Can you find dF?
So please pause the video, take a minute
to see what you can do.
And then come back if you need a hint.
And then I'll give you another chance
to solve the problem, with or without the hint.

OK, just a hint in case you're stuck on things
because this looks a little bit different,
but it's actually a trivial special case.
We wrote down Ito's lemma in terms of x,
but this is just a special case.
So we have here--

this is really just a special case, where dx is equal to dB.
And that means, in terms of our general expression,
if I write this as adt plus bdB, that
implies that a is equal to 0 and little b is equal to 1.
So I find it sometimes helpful to write the assumptions out
explicitly.
And that means that we can write Ito's lemma in this form.
We can say that Ito's lemma is dF, is going to be partial of F
with respect to t dt plus partial of F--
now normally I would have written with partial of F
with respect to x.
But in this case, because d--
sorry-- dx and dB are the same thing,
we can write this just in terms of dB.
So let's write this as partial dB plus the Ito term, which
is normally little b squared.
But again, because we have that b is equal to 1,
we can simplify this.
And we can write this as 1/2 second partial of F
with respect to B squared times dt.
And now let's combine the first and last terms to get us
something that we can use easily.
So this is going to be partial of F
with respect to t plus 1/2 second partial of F
with respect to B squared.
It doesn't matter whether you do this
before or after, of course, because addition
is commutative.
This is times dt plus partial of F with respect to B dB.
So take a moment now, and see if you
can compute dF for our function F, which
is t cubed plus B cubed.

OK, let's take a look.

We have that F is t cubed, plus B cubed.
So let's just compute the partial derivatives.
Partial of F with respect to t is 3t squared.
Partial of F with respect to B is 3B squared.
In the second partial derivative of F with respect to B
squared is going to be 6B.
So let's take those results, plug them into our formulas.
And we're going to have here-- this
is going to be 3t squared plus 1/2
of the second partial derivative.
That's going to be 6B divided by 2.
That's going to give us plus 3B, all times dt,
plus our last term just has a single partial, partial of F
with respect to B, which is 3B squared times dB.
So that's our answer.
So we have a big 3 out in front, and we
could write this as 3 times t squared
plus B dt plus B squared dB.
Question?
Is this an Ito process?
Answer.

What do you think?
If it is an Ito process, write down little a and little b.
If it's not an Ito process, why not?
Well it is an Ito process because we have
something dt plus something dB.
And in this case, let me call it a--
maybe we'll call it a sub F. It's
going to be 3t squared plus 3B.
So notice that's of the form function of t and B.
And similarly, b F is going to be 3B squared.
So that's our answer for this exercise.