
PROFESSOR: Now here's an exercise.
Let F be the function of t and B,
where B is a standard Brownian motion,
be e to the minus rt times the sine of theta B.
So r and theta are both constants.
And what we'd like to do are two things.
First, find the differential dF using Ito's lemma.
Second, looking at the result that you have, consider
the parameter values, r and theta,
and ask if there are choices of r and theta in terms of which,
dF becomes particularly simple, where
it becomes only, either a function of dt
or a function of dB.
So pause the video.
Take a few minutes to work on it.
And then we'll go through the solution together.

Now we'll use the simplified form of Ito's lemma
because we have it in terms of B,
not in a more complicated generalized Ito process.
So let's take a look.
We have that dx is just dB.
So in our version of Ito's lemma,
where we take differentials with respect
to x, we can just replace them by B.
And where we have the Ito term with little b squared--
remember that in our usual notation, this is a equals 0
and little b equals 1.
So that simplifies.
The next thing we do is we compute
the partial derivatives, the three partial derivatives that
show up in Ito's formula, of F. So we need partial
of F with respect to time.
That's easy.
That's e to the minus rt times minus r times sine of theta B.
So we can rewrite that as, minus r times F itself,
if we'd like to.
We can use either of those forms.
We have the second partial derivative
in the first partial derivative with respect
to B. So partial of F with respect to B
is just equal to theta times e to the minus rt
times cosine of theta B.
And the second partial derivative
is going to be second partial of F with respect to B squared
is going to be minus theta squared e to the minus rt
times sine of theta B. And that is the same thing
as minus theta squared times F. Minus theta
squared times F because the e to the minus rt
just comes along for the ride.

So let's just substitute with our results.
So we have that dF is the partial of F with respect
to t times to dt.
That's going to give us a minus re
to the minus rt sine theta B, all times
dt plus first partial with respect to B times dB.
That's going to give us theta e the minus rt cosine theta B
times dB plus the Ito term, which
is going to be 1/2 second partial with respect to b
squared of F times dt.
So that's going to give us minus theta squared
e to the minus rt divided by 2 times sine theta B dt.
If we group the terms together we see,
first of all, that everything--
the common e to the minus rt out in front.
That's good to keep in mind.
And then the first term we're going
to have is going to be give us a minus r
plus theta squared over 2 times sine theta B dt.

Let's see.
We wanted to have a big thing for our exponential outside
of everything.
And we've got our second term.
It's going to be the dB term.
It's going to be plus theta e to the minus rt cosine theta B dB.
And there we go.
So this expression gives us our result or dF.

So that's our expression.
So it's an Ito process because it's
something times dt plus something times dB, OK?
So if we want to write down these coefficient functions,
we could say that we have a F is going to be minus
e to the minus rt times r plus theta squared over 2 sine theta
B. And that's definitely a function of t and B.
And B is going to be e to the minus rt times theta
cosine of theta B. And that's definitely
a function of time and B. Sorry, it's behind my head.
So let's take a look at the expression
and see if we can answer the second question,
are there values of r and theta, in which this
would simplify to only be a function of dt or dB?
Well it can't possibly be a function only of dB.
Remember, the dB is our source of randomness.
And we can't make the randomness go away just by changing
variables in a simple way.
We're not going to turn something
that was random into something that's non-random that easily.
We'll see some other ways to do that.
But what about the first term?
Well the first term is e to the minus rt,
but now notice the coefficient function.
It involves r plus theta squared over 2.
So if I chose r to be minus theta squared over 2,
then the first term would vanish.
Usually, when we have r in our expressions,
we think of r as being the risk-free interest rate.
And normally the risk-free interest rate
needs to be a positive number.
But keep in mind that, there certainly
are negative interest rates that actually do now
happen in the real world, even though we normally
would think of r as being typically positive.
And here in this example, this is not
meant to be a financial example.
These are just arbitrary parameter choices.
So we certainly could pick a special value
of r, in terms of which the coefficient function of t
would vanish.
And then we'd be left with just the term in dB.
So, a simple case where we took a basic function,
not additive but multiplicative, a function of r times--
excuse me, a function of time, times a function of B,
applied Ito's lemma, turn the crank and we get our answer.
That's all there is to it.