
PROFESSOR: Suppose x is a stochastic process
that's defined by the expression dx
over x equals mu dt plus sigma dB,
where mu and sigma are both constants,
and we'd like to find a function F
in terms of which dF is an Ito process
with constant coefficients.
So take a moment to think about it.
Think about how you'd approach it,
if you can set it up, and then let's take a look at it
together.

I'd like to do this systematically.
So you might have gotten it by inspection
or had a clever guess, or maybe you've seen it before.
But let's see how we can work through this systematically.
What we'd like to do is use the different ways
that we can write dF to solve systematically
for such a function.
And we're going to do it by deriving some equations that F
has to satisfy in order that the coefficients aF and BF would
be constant.
So two things we want to do-- first of all,
let's just identify our-- the parts of our function,
our function dx, by writing dx is
equal to mu x times dt plus sigma x time dB.
So in our usual notation for an Ito process,
we have a is the function mu x.
B is the function sigma x.
So that all just comes from here.
That's direct.
Now, let's apply Ito to dF using the expressions
that we have worked out earlier.
So let's say that dF is equal to something times dt.
Well, what's the coefficient of dt?

We have the partial of F with respect
to t plus we have the Ito term, B squared over 2,
which, in our case, is sigma x squared over 2 times
the second partial of F dx squared plus we have a term
a dF dx.
So this is going to be mu x times partial of F
with respect to x.
And this whole thing times dt plus another term,
which is going to be a little bit simpler--
this is going to be sigma x, which
is little b, partial of F with respect to x, times dB.
So this is the form of Ito's lemma
where we combine terms into something times
dt for something times dB rather than something times dt
plus something times dx.
So in this term, what we'd like is
we'd like the things in these brackets.
Let me make these red brackets now.
This should be a constant, and so should this.
Now, the second one has only one term.
The first one has three.
So why don't we work in the easy one first?
So we need a function F so that this expression here
is a constant.

That is, we need F t and x such that sigma
x partial of F with respect to x is a constant.

Well, I can easily move the-- we can divide both sides
of this equation by sigma.
Divide that by sigma over here.
And in the left, we'll do division by erasure.
So I have this expression.
That's just another constant.
The sigma is a nonzero constant.
So this says, what is the function
such that x-- partial of F with respect to x is a constant?
Well, if F were a function of x only, that would be easy.
So suppose if t and x is just F of x.
Then we would have x partial of F with respect
to x is some constant.
Let's call it c.
It's our old constant, which was unspecified, divided by sigma.
In this equation, we can integrate.
This just says that dF is equal to c
dx over x, which tells us that F is equal to c times log x.
So let's check this expression and see
that it satisfies at least giving a constant coefficient
of our second term.
We notice that if we come back up over here,
we have x partial of F with respect to x, in this case,
is going to be x times d over x.
And it's equal to c, which is, indeed, a constant.
And that's the term that went here.
So, in fact, we would find that this
would have coefficient sigma c, where c
is our constant of integration.
What about our term above?
Well, let's continue with this form of x.
So if F of x-- let me move out of the way--
is the expression that we had here.

And, in fact-- so it's something times the logarithm of x.
The first partial derivative here is going to vanish.
The second partial derivative is going
to give minus c over x squared.
The x squared will cancel this x squared.
And this will be a constant.
There won't be any more x's.
And over here, similarly, partial of F with respect to x
gives me c over x.
And the x multiplies this x.
And those cancel out.
And I'm left with a constant.
So what we find is--

so we find that the specific choice F of x
equals c log x gives dF.
It's going to be equal to c sigma
squared over 2 with a minus sign in front
from the second derivative term plus c
mu, all times dt plus c sigma dB.

And now let's let c equals 1.
It's a little bit simpler.
Since these are constants, anyways,
we'll come back to our old friend.
So this is equal to--
let's just write this as C in front times u minus sigma
squared over 2 dt plus sigma dB.

And this is the differential of F.
So in the lecture, I wrote down the choice
of a function that was the logarithm of a stock price.
And we derived this equation as a result--
that we said that this equation for the logarithm of F was,
in fact, integrable because both the left-hand sides--
left- and right-hand sides were differentials.
Now we see that we come to the same expression
if we ask a different question.
That's how we got it to be differentiable
in the first place.
If we said, what functions are there
such that the expressions we get are going
to be integrable with constant coefficients,
the answer to that equation is the function
we need is the logarithm.
