
PROFESSOR: When we derived the Black-Scholes equation
in lecture, it had two parts.
An expression for the stock dynamics is an Ito process
and then an expression for the derivative the
used Ito's lemma.
And then we combine the two in a portfolio, canceled the risk,
and found a partial differential equation, which
had no risk in it, and then we can solve that
by ordinary techniques.
Now one thing that we might ask is,
what if stocks don't follow random walks?
What if stocks don't follow geometric Brownian motion?
How important is that?
Does the whole option-pricing relationship fall apart?
Quite the opposite.
So let's take a look.
Suppose we have a general Ito process, where we have dS,
is given by any function, a times
dt plus any other function b of t and S times dB,
times the random part.
Let's see what happens in our derivation.
Which parts go through and which parts change.
So remember when we did it before, we had previously,
this was dS was equal to uSdt plus sigma S dB.
So these were very special forms of coefficient functions. a
and b in particular, they're time independent,
they're linear in S. And that's it.
So those were quite special, but let's leave a and b
completely general.
So that was one part.
The other part we're going to leave identical.
So let's let V is going to be a general function of t and S, is
the value of the derivative security
on the underlying security whose price is given by S.
And you notice some places, I've had little subscripts, t,
on my variables.
From now on, generally, I'm going
to assume that we know that our capital letters are
random variables, they're stochastic processes,
and that they're time dependent.
In our coefficient functions, a and b and F and V,
our value functions, are going to be ordinary functions
but they're functions of random variables.
So sometimes it was convenient to put a little subscript, t,
down here and over here, to remind us that these
are the random variables.
But by now it should be clear in context that S or x or V
are always going to be functions, possibly
explicitly of time, but they're going to be random variables.
And those random variables are time dependent.
OK.
So what did we have for dV?
Well, dV was given because it's a derivative,
it doesn't have any choice.
It depends on S. And what it depends on also is Ito's lemma
and that's just math.
So it's given by--
excuse me, we're working in v instead of f.
Just a different part of the alphabet for a change.
And it's conventional in literature,
when we're talking about derivatives,
that you can pick your favorite letter.
So this is going to be partial of v with respect to tdt.
Partial of v with respect to SdS.

And then, plus the Ito term, which
will be b squared over 2, second partial of F with respect to S
squared dt.
OK.
So this b over here is the same one as this coefficient there.
So all I've done is I've just left us in more general form.
Let's follow the same steps.
So this is, just to mark this up a little bit,
this defines dynamics of the underlying.

This is just Ito's lemma.
We'll call it Ito's formula for V.
And now we'd like to build a portfolio.

In our portfolio, pi will consist
of being long one derivative and minus a quantity, q,
that I'll give the name delta, in this case.
Think of them as shares of stock.
So I have delta shares of stock with value S.
So this is the value of the portfolio,
and then we'd like to ask about its change of value,
its differential.
So we have d pi, is going to be dV minus delta dS.
And when we combined terms, we saw
that this was terms with a dt times partial of V
with respect to t.
That comes from up here.
| have my Ito term, it's going to be plus b squared over 2.
Second partial of V with respect to S squared.

And then I'm going to have a term, which
is going to be plus dS, and it's going to have partial of V
with respect to S from right here.
And it's going to have a delta term
from here, which is delta dS.
And because it's written in that form I really
don't want to go to the trouble of expanding out this dS,
writing it in terms of its original defining parts, do I?
Because I can cancel it out right there where it sits.
So our strategy was let's let delta equal partial
of V with respect to S. That makes
the risky term on the right, on the second term
of the right hand side, vanish.
And then we can have an expression
for a risk free portfolio.
So if we set delta equal to partial of V with respect to S.
If we do this, then two things happen.
That risky term in dS vanishes.

So that's one.
And two, we would say that pi earns the risk free rate.

Rate of interest.

Because otherwise it would be arbitrage.
So in that case, we have the d pi is going to be equal,
on the one hand, dt times the first term and that's it.
The second one will drop out.

And this has to be equal to the risk
free rate of growth, which will be r pi dt infinitesimally.
And that's our basic expression.
Now, I'm going to do a little bit more elaboration on it.
But up to here, what depended on the particular choice
of stock dynamics?
So the answer is almost nothing.
But the only thing that shows up, it depends on the form
that we began with up here.
It does not depend on the sigma S.
The sigma S does mean that when we get expressions like this
here, this would be sigma squared S squared over 2
in the Black-Scholes equation.
Here it's general.
It's b squared over 2.
What about the a term?
The a term goes away.
Nothing depends on it.
It's dropped out completely.
Well it's not completely dropped out.
In a sense, the a term is part of dS,
but we canceled the dS term.
So whatever relationship there is between the
a function in the stock, and the subsequent behavior
of the derivative, it's already been taken care of
or it's already been canceled out of the equation.
It no longer matters when we have a portfolio that
balances exactly the right amount
of the derivative security in the right amount
of the underlying.
So we still have a b, which we haven't specified.
So the only difference at this point,
from our Black-Scholes equation, is that instead of b squared,
we would have had sigma squared S squared.
And then we expanded out and we have the same thing
that we had before.
We simply write this as r times V minus delta S times dt.
And now we notice that on the left hand, right hand sides,
I have everything in dt.
Moving everything to the same side
or if you'd like, dividing by dt,
because there are no more stochastic differentials,
we can put in our dt times partial of V with respect to t
plus b squared over 2.
d2 of V squared plus r partial of V with respect to S--
should be rS--
minus rV.
And this whole thing is equal to zero.
And therefore the coefficient, the thing in the brackets,
has to be equal to zero.
The thing that is the coefficient of dt.
So that's it.
That's our generalization.
So given an Ito process, a general Ito
process up here, in terms of anything
with any coefficient a and any coefficient
b, we've got the Black-Scholes equation, with the only thing
that we need to do is to substitute
in the appropriate b.
So here's your chance to try it out.
