PROFESSOR: An asset follows the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process,
which is a continuous time, mean reverting process if it's
given by the expression, dS equals
lambda, which is a constant, times S
bar, another constant, nimus S dt plus sigma dB.
This is in the continuous time analog of an AR1 process.
This is the standardized Brownian motion, sigma dB,
where sigma is a scale factor for the randomness.
Over here, we see I've got mean reversion, where
if lambda's a positive constant, this
tells me that if S is below S bar, this is positive.
If this S is above S bar, this is negative.
So this gives me a mean reversion force,
and this gives me a random shock as time has evolved.
So, just given this description, which
is quite different from the log normal, geometric Brownian
motion that was part of the original Black-Scholes-Merton
derivation, this is a different process.
What PDE is satisfied by derivatives of this asset?
Take a moment, and then we'll check together.

What did you find?
Did you rederive using Ito's Lemma?
We don't even need to work that hard, we can just
plug into our last result. We know
it looks exactly like the Black-Scholes equation,
with exactly one change.
We identify, in terms of our standard form,
if we want to write dS of the form a dt plus b dB.
That implies that we have a is equal to lambda, S bar
minus S, which doesn't appear in the differential equation
we want.
And we have b is equal to sigma.
In the Black-Scholes equation, it
would have been sigma times S.
So the equation we want is partial of V with respect
to t plus sigma squared over 2 second partial of V
with respect to S squared plus rS partial of V
with respect to S minus rV equals 0 and we're done.

That's it.
So the only difference between this and Black-Scholes
is that-- the coefficient function here in front
would have had an S squared in Black-Scholes.
Here, it only has a sigma.
The a function, which was mu S in the case of Black-Scholes.
And here, it's something linear and S.
It could have been cubic.
It could have been any polynomial function or a more
complicated function in S.
It wouldn't make any difference.
It wouldn't show up as part of the differential equation.
It might show up elsewhere.
And it certainly shows up if we want
to understand the dynamics of the underlying itself.
But if we want to know about the derivatives,
given the behavior of the underlying,
our expression is easy to derive.
And all we needed to do was, in our derivation,
once we canceled the risk, the only part that
retained an explicit memory of the Ito process,
was the Ito term, which had the coefficient B squared,
the coefficient of the randomness in the original we
defined process.
