
PROFESSOR: Hi, everyone, and welcome to the Foundations
of Modern Finance, Part II.
This course is a continuation of part I.
We hope that you had a good learning
experience in the first part of the course,
and are excited to welcome you back.
We were impressed by your engagement and hard work
in Part I, and encourage you to keep it up in Part II.
Our courses at a MIT Sloan are challenging.
We believe that it is important to have
deep understanding of the foundational principles
of finance, and we hope that you will continue working
towards achieving this goal.
The content covered in the second part of the course
is exciting.
We begin this course by learning about financial derivatives,
such as forwards, futures, swaps, and options.
These are important financial instruments
and are used widely by a variety of market participants.
For example, asset owners and asset managers
use derivatives to protect the value of their holdings.
Corporations use derivatives, such as swaps and currency
forwards to smooth fluctuations in the cost of doing business.
For example, airlines use crude oil and heating oil swaps
to hedge their exposure to oil prices, which
affect their cost of fuel.
We will spend the first three weeks of our course learning
about these topics.
We will then move on to portfolio theory
and the Capital Asset Pricing Model, commonly known
as the CAPM.
Recall that we have already learned a very important asset
pricing model in Part I--
the Arbitrage Pricing Theory.
In Part II, we will learn how CAPM differs from APT.
Importantly, CAPM is one of the most widely used asset pricing
models in practice, particularly in corporate finance
to estimate the cost of capital.
We will spend two weeks on these topics.
In the second half of this course,
we will learn about corporate finance.
We will cover topics such as Modigliani-Miller Theorem,
weighted average cost of capital,
or WACC, and the adjusted present value.
We will then discuss interplays between investment decisions
and financing decisions.
We will conclude this module with a discussion
of how firms should return the capital back to shareholders,
which we refer to as a payout policy, and corporate risk
management.
Throughout this course, we will be heavily relying on tools
that we learned in Part I. For example, state-space model will
become very handy when we will be pricing
options and corporate debt.
Because this course builds on Part I, learners
who have completed Part I are best positioned
to understand the content covered in this course
and succeed in it.
To emphasize that this course--
Part II-- is a continuation of Part I,
we have numbered content weeks in this course,
starting from 11.
We strongly recommend that you take Part I
before attempting this course, or Part II.
If you're interested in finance and in our MicroMasters
program, but have not yet had a chance to take Part I,
we suggest that you instead start
by taking either our accounting course
or our mathematical methods course, both of which
serve as entry points into our program.
You can then take Foundations of Modern Finance,
Part I when it is next offered.
You can find the complete schedule of our courses
on our MIT MicroMasters website, as well as
in our edX MicroMasters program page.
