
LEONID KOGAN: I am Leonid Kogan.
JIANG WANG: I'm Jiang Wang.
Welcome to Foundations of Modern Finance.
We are the instructors for this course.
Here, we would like to give a brief description
about the structure and content of the course.
This course consists of two parts.
Part 1 develops the basics of modern finance,
and Part 2 covers the more advanced topics.
LEONID KOGAN: Part two of the course has three sections.
Sections A and B valuation of derivative securities,
portfolio theory, and the capital asset pricing model.
Section C covers a range of topics in corporate finance,
including capital budgeting and real options, capital structure
choice, and interactions between firm investment and financing
decisions.
In Section A, we explore valuation and applications
of derivative securities.
In Lecture 1, we introduce forward
contracts, futures, and swaps.
We discuss the economic properties, valuation methods,
and how they can be used for risk management.
In Lecture 2 we introduce options.
We cover the basic properties of options,
their valuation models, including
the risk neutral valuation and the Black-Scholes model,
and dynamic hedging.
In Lecture 3, we cover the portfolio theory,
and the mean-variance preferences.
In Lecture 4, we use the results on optimal portfolio choice
to derive the capital asset pricing model, or CAPM.
This is a central pricing theory,
which relates expected returns on financial assets
to their risk.
We discuss applications of the CAPM
and its empirical performance.
JIANG WANG: In Section 3 of Part 2 of the course,
we will return to corporate finance,
and complete our analysis of firms' financial decisions.
In Lecture 6, we will utilize the risk and valuation
tools we have developed in the course
to determine the appropriate discount rates,
and to value real options in capital budgeting decisions.
We turn to firms' financing decisions in Lecture 7.
In particular, we examine a firm's optimal choices
in capital structure, payout policy, and risk management
in the benchmark case where market frictions are
negligible.
Lecture 8 examines the credit risk
of a firm when it uses debt to finance its business.
In particular, how it's assessed and priced in the market.
In Lecture 9, we consider how different forms
of market frictions such as taxes, information and agency
costs, and imperfections in the financial market
will influence the firm's financing decisions.
Lecture 10 considers how a firm's investment and financing
decisions interact with each other.
In particular, we will consider the investment and financing
decisions in the holistic manner,
in how to achieve maximum value creation for the firm's
stakeholders.
We will be working together with you throughout this course,
and hope you will enjoy it.