
PROFESSOR: In this video, I would
like to talk more specifically about the structure
of this course.
Similar to Part 1, this course is 12 weeks long.
It starts with this week, Week 0.
Then 10 weeks of the course content, and one week
dedicated to the final exam.
It is an instructor-paced course,
and we will be releasing content each Wednesday
at 15:00 hours Coordinated Universal Time, or UTC.
Similar to part one, each week's content
will have three components: lectures, presentations,
and problem sets.
Lecture videos deliver the main content
and introduce you to major concepts.
We encourage you to continue engaging
with the concept checks that accompany the lectures.
We have received feedback from you
that these are a useful learning tool,
and we hope that they help you understand the material
of each learning module.
Recitations are designed to bridge the gap between lectures
and problem sets.
The recitation content will help you understand and apply
the relevant lecture concepts, and will
help you solidify your understanding of the material.
As in part one, the problem sets of this course
are due each Wednesday at 15:00 hours UTC.
You have exactly one week to finish each problem set.
As a matter of policy, homework deadlines will not be extended.
We do recognize, however, that circumstances
can arise that prevent you from meeting every single deadline,
and want to offer some flexibility.
Therefore, we have decided to drop your two lowest homework
scores at the end of the course.
In other words, of the 10 homeworks,
only the eight that you score highest on
will be counted towards your cumulative score.
We would like to re-emphasize the importance
of working diligently and consistently
throughout the course.
Do not fall behind.
Content is cumulative, and if you do not work consistently,
it will be difficult to catch up.
Data shows positive correlation between consistent work
and final exam scores.
In other words, if you would like to get a higher grade,
you need to work consistently.
My advice to you is to start each week's work early
and to put effort into learning the material.
You should plan to spend at least 10 hours a week
to succeed in this course.
You will not pass this course if you spend two hours a week
on it.
Because of this at time commitment,
we advise you to first realistically determine
if you can afford to spend this much time each week.
If you decide to take this course,
we strongly advise you to plan ahead, to schedule time
each week to study, and to work consistently.
Similar to Part 1, there will be a two-hour final exam
at the end of the course.
We're excited to have you back.
We will release week 11 of the course content next week.
Until then, we recommend that you
review your notes from Part 1 and get
ready to continue your journey of mastering finance.
