
PROFESSOR: You learned the basics of options
and other parts of the MicroMasters Program,
but I want to quickly review them here.
Options confer upon their holder the right but not
the obligation to buy or sell a pre-specified security
or commodity at a predetermined price, which is also
called the strike price.
A call option gives the right to buy.
A put option gives the right to sell.
Using the option is called exercising the option.
Options have fixed maturity dates which
are called expiration dates.
A European-style style option can only
be exercised on the expiration date of the contract.
An American option can be exercised any time up
and until its expiration.
I remember that difference with the mnemonic
that the E in European stands for End, and the A in American
stands for Any time.
The seller of an option is said to write the option.
The option writer receives the option premium,
which is the price paid for the option.
The premium is paid up front.
The right to buy or sell at a predetermined price
is valuable, and options always have a positive value
to the holder and a cost to the writer.
The premium is compensation for that cost.
Although American options are more common in practice
than European options, it's much easier
to analyze and price European options.
European options pricing formulas also often work
for American options.
Hence, we'll focus on European options to build intuition
and to develop basic pricing formulas.
Towards the end of this lecture, we'll
also consider an example of the modifications
we'll need to analyze the price of American options.
Options on the stocks of many large firms
are listed on exchanges.
If you're interested in taking a look at data that's currently
available on a particular firm, I
suggest you go to the website of the Chicago Board Options
Exchange, or CBOE, and take a look.
But here, we have an example of the options
available on a particular day on Apple stock.
The most recent stock trade that day was recorded to be $377.37.
As is typical in this market, there's
put and call options, which are available with a variety
of strike prices on both sides of the current stock price
and with a variety of maturities.
For instance, the Apple October $380 call, which is right here,
has a strike price of $380.
It expires in 79 days.
The options contract can be purchased for $24.20,
the ask price.
It can be sold for the bid price of $23.75.
Just so you get an idea of what is available
and where, this slide lists the major exchanges where options
are actively traded and the broad categories
of exchange-traded options contracts.
As we saw for futures, traded options
offer the protection of central clearing, which minimizes
default or counterparty risk.
The exchange requires margin to be
posted to ensure performance.
Unlike futures, where the margin requirements
are symmetric for the long and short sides of the contract
because the risks are also symmetric,
in the options market, where the risk is asymmetric,
it's the seller who has to pose a large enough margin
to ensure that the seller's obligation can be met.

To determine the payoffs on a European call option,
we consider the optimal actions of the call option
buyer at the expiration date, capital T.
If the stock price on that date, s sub T,
is less than the strike price, then the option
should never be exercised.
If the option buyer wants to buy the stock,
they can do that more cheaply by buying the stock
in the open market rather than by paying the strike price
and exercising the option.

If the stock price is greater than the strike price,
it's optimal to exercise the option.
That's because by exercising the option
and paying k for a stock that's currently worth more than
that, they realize a payoff of the price of the stock
minus the strike price.

That's true whether or not the option buyer
wants to keep the stock in their portfolio,
since if they don't want to keep the stock,
they can immediately sell it after the exercise the option.
The equation on the bottom of the slide
summarizes this logic, stating that the payoff
on a long position in a call option
is the maximum of the difference at the expiration
date between the stock price and the strike price and 0.
The payout for a call option can be plotted on a payoff diagram.
Remember that a payoff diagram shows the profit
from a cash or derivatives position as a function
of the underlying asset.
In the example here, the underlying
is one share of stock, and the option
has a strike price, k, of 100.
The payoff is $0 if the stock price at expiration
is less than $100, and rises 1 for 1 with the stock price
when the stock price exceeds $100.
I also want to remind you that we
can plot the sum of multiple positions on a payoff diagram.
If instead, we were looking at a call
option for two shares of the stock
instead of for just one share, the upward-sloping part
of the line would be twice as steep.
So we get a figure that looks like this.

There's also some terminology you should know.
And out of the money call option is
one where the strike price is greater than the current price
of the underlying.
And in the money call option, it has a strike price
that's less than the current market price of the underlying.
And at the money call, it has a strike price
that equals the current price of the underlying.
We'll use the abbreviations OTM, ITM and ATM
to describe each of those situations.
As we're all cash or derivative positions,
the payoff on a short position is
the negative of the payoff on the long position.
In terms of payoff diagrams, then, that
flips the payoff over the x-axis.
For a short call option, the payoff
has the characteristic shape shown here.
We can use the same sort of analysis
to infer the payoff on a European put option
by considering the optimal actions of the put option buyer
at the expiration date, capital T.
If the stock price is less than the strike price at T,
then it's optimal to exercise the option.
That's because by exercising the option
and receiving the strike price, k, for a stock that's currently
worth less than k, they realized a positive payoff
equal to k minus the value of the stock.

That's true whether or not the option holder
wants to keep the stock in their portfolio.
If they still do want to hold it,
they can immediately buy the stock in the open market
after delivering it in the options contract,
leaving them with a stock and also with a gain
from the payoff on the options contract.
Now, if the stock price is greater
than the strike price, k, then the option
should not be exercised.
If the option holder wants to sell the stock,
they can get more for it by selling
the stock in the open market than by exercising the option.
The equation at the bottom of the slide
summarizes this logic, stating that the payoff is
the maximum of the difference between the strike price
and the stock price and $0.
We can plot the payoff for a long put
position on a payoff diagram to get this characteristic shape.

This example is, again, based on a strike
price of $100 and a put option contract
based on one share of stock.

Also, as usual, the payoff diagram for a short position
flips the picture for the long position over the x-axis.
Note that for puts also, the slope parts of the lines
can be made steeper by increasing
the number of contracts or the number of stocks specified
in a single contract.
Focusing on payoffs alone gives an incomplete picture
of the cash flows involved in options
transactions, because it neglects
the upfront premium paid from the buyer
to the writer of the option.
In fact, just looking at the payoff diagram,
it suggests that one would never write
an option because the best outcome would involve a zero
payoff.
And payoff diagrams make an option
look like a free lunch with no possibility of loss
from the perspective of the long side.
Profit diagrams give a more complete picture of the cash
flows involved by subtracting the upfront premium
from the payoffs to the buyers and adding it
to the payoffs of the sellers.
Note that profit diagrams typically
don't adjust for the higher future value of the premiums
because they're paid up front.
That distortion tends to be small
when interest rates are low and for short-dated options.
The graphs here show how taking into account
the premium in a profit diagram causes
those diagrams to differ from the corresponding payoff
diagrams.
It's clear in a profit diagram that there's
no free lunch for option buyers, and that option sellers.
profit when market conditions are such that options
are allowed to expire without exercise.
Despite that seeming advantage of profit diagrams
in providing a more complete picture,
path diagrams are actually more common.
That's because they give a clear idea
of the amounts that will change hands
at the contract expiration.
Knowing the outcomes at that time
is useful in evaluating trading strategies,
and also, it's an essential input
into the pricing of the contracts.
