
PROFESSOR: A classic use of payoff diagrams
is to provide a simple proof of the famous put-call parity
relationship.
That relationship says that the value of a portfolio consisting
of a long put in a short call both with the same strike
price K is equal to the present value
of a short forward contract with a forward price K.
It's important to keep in mind that the options
in forward contracts refer to the same stock
and the derivative contracts all have the same expiration
date, T.
The additional notation that you see here
is that put refers to the price of the put and hence,
its premium.
Call is the call price or the call premium
and are as the usual risk-free rate.
Recall that the value of the short position in an existing
forward contract with forward price K, by no arbitrage,
has to be the present value of the difference between K
at the current forward price for the contract in the market.
Now to prove that equation must hold,
we start by establishing that the two sides of the equation
have the same payoffs for every possible value of the stock
price at time T. We show this graphically,
adding together along put and a short call
and seeing that the sum is the same
as a short forward contract.

Next we applied the idea of no-arbitrage
to observe that if the two positions have
identical payoffs in every future state of the world,
they must have identical prices today.
That observation leads immediately
to the put-call parity equation that's written again
at the bottom of the slide.
The put-call parity relationship is
famous because of its practical importance
in a variety of situations.
It can be used by traders looking
to profit from pricing inconsistencies
between the securities involved.
It can also be used to quickly find
the price of a put given the pricing formula for a call
or vice versa.
It also highlights that many positions
can be described either in terms of puts or in terms of calls
that having these multiple ways of looking at things
is very helpful in understanding the risk
characteristics of a position.
For example, we'll use put-call parity
to help understand the risk dynamics of levered firms
and also of risky corporate debt.
You can use a put-call parity equation
like any other algebraic equation,
for example, rearranging it to solve
for the value of a call in terms of the value
of a put at a forward contract.
Or you can solve it for a put in terms of a value
call in a forward contract.
Negative values denote short positions and positive values
denote long positions.
The first line here rearranges the equation
to solve for the value of a put.

Then using our pricing formula from
before for a forward contract, we
can substitute out the current forward price f sub 0 t
and replace it with the future value of the current stock
price as zero.

The last line then expresses the put call parity relationship
in terms of put, a call, the current stock price
at the present value of the exercise price
K. It's quite common to see this equation in this form.
To give a numerical example, say you
have a stock selling for $100, a risk free rate of 5%
and an at the money call option priced at $10.45.
Then it must be the case that a put option on the stock that
expires in one year and also has a strike price of 100
sells for $5.57 It's a good exercise for you to think
about the trades you'd have to make
to realize a risk free profit if instead this put
was priced differently.
Say it was selling for $6.
Think about what portfolio you would buy
and what you would sell in order to realize an arbitrage profit.
