INSTRUCTOR: In this segment, we'll
take a look at some of the most popular trading strategies
involving put and call options that you
can use to manage risk exposures in your own portfolio
and on behalf of your firm or for your clients.
A simple and effective way to retain the upside risk
on an individual stock or other security
and to limit the downside is with a protective put.
The strategy simply involves buying a put option
on the stock that you want protection for.
The payoff diagram here shows the combination
of the put option in the stock, so it assumes
you already are long the stock.

Here's the payoff on the put option.

Here's the payoff on the stock.
And now if you vertically add the payoffs and the put
in the stock, you get the total payoff, equal to the red line.

This the strike price on the put option
provides the floor then on the payoff
on the stock over the horizon T of the option.
The more protection that you want, the higher
is strike price you would choose on the put.
As you'd expect, a higher strike price
means paying a higher premium so in choosing
the level of protection, there's a trade off
between getting more protection at a higher price and less
protection at a lower price.
This is a good place to stop and compare
the protection from a protective put
with that of a short forward or futures contract.
For example, a fund manager may be
concerned about protecting the fall
in the price of a particular stock, currently priced in S.
It could hedge that risk by selling
shorter forward contract on the stock, which
would have a forward price K, which we know
will be equal to the future value of the current spot
price, S. Doing that entirely eliminates the stock price
risk between now and the expiration
date of the forward contract.

The firm eliminates the downside but it also loses the upside.
It costs nothing to enter into this position upfront.
Alternatively, the fund manager could buy a put option
with a strike price of K. As we just discussed,
that would guarantee a minimum payoff of K
and leave the firm with the upside
if the stock is worth more than that.
That's a better outcome but it comes with an upfront cost
of the option premium.
You can think of the second option as equivalent
to an insurance contract, where you
pay a premium to be protected against losses
but you always keep the gains.
Relatedly, put options are the basis
for all strategies that are marketed
as portfolio insurance.
There's no right answer to the question of which
of these strategies is better.
The strategy of using a forward contract
will be preferred if the goal is to eliminate all risk.
Using a put option is better if you're
willing to pay the premium for the benefit of keeping
the upside.
Another popular strategy is called a covered call.
This strategy involves writing a call option that
puts a cap on price appreciation for a stock or stock index
that you already own.
You're long the stock and short the call.
And the sum of the two positions is, again, the red line.

Why would anyone want to limit the upside pay off
on their portfolio?
Well, of course, no one wants to limit their upside
but what attracts investors to covered calls
is the income from writing the call options.
If you think that the price appreciation is likely to be
slower in the future --
for instance, you think returns on the S&P 500 would be more
modest than most investors expect they will be --
you may prefer to give up the upside in exchange
for the certain option premium.
And even more pessimistic strategy
is called a bear spread.
A bear spread is a position that, like a put option,
benefits the long side when the stock price falls.
Unlike a put option, the potential gain
is capped at a fixed value.
As for a covered call, the reason to cap the gain
is to reduce the net cost of taking
the position with the premium income from the short side.

Setting up a bear spread involves selling a put option
with a strike price of K1 and, at the same time,
taking a long position in a second
put option with a strike price of K2.

The sum of the long and short put options
gives the red payoff line.

The specific example here centers it
at the current stock price of $100
and chooses K1 equal to 80 and K2 to equal to 120.
Since your long one option and short another,
you might wonder if this position
costs money or makes money.
The answer is that it has to cost money
because for all possible future realizations of the stock
price, the payoff is positive or 0.
The other indication that this position must cost money
is that, all else equal, a put option with a higher strike
price will be worth more than a put option that's
otherwise similar but with a lower strike price.
If, instead, you wanted to make an optimistic bet
about a stock's prospects, you could enter into a bull spread.
A bull spread has a positive payoff
when the underlying stock price exceeds some value,
and that payoff is capped.

As with the bear spread, the reason for the cap
is to reduce the net cost of getting the desired.
Risk exposure this strategy involves a long position
in a call option with a strike price, K1 and a short position
in a second call option with a strike price of K2
to greater than K1.

The sum of the two call options creates
the payoff shown here in red.

As with the other positions we've
looked at with only positive payoffs,
remember that entering this position
comes at a cost, which is the difference
between the premiums on the long and short call options.
In the recitation, JR will show you
how to set up the same position using
put options and a risk-free bond and the idea
of put-call parity.
A butterfly spread has a positive payoff
over some range of time T stock price realizations.
Its tent-shaped payoff is like the wings of a butterfly,
and that's how it got its name.

That's what the payoff looks like.
Creating a butterfly spread involves four call options
with three different strike prices and a combination
of long and short positions.
First, there's going to be a long call with strike price K0.

Next, there's two short calls with a strike price of K1,
where K1 centers your position.
You can think of each short call option as looking like this.

So we have two of these short call options.
And then, when we add them together,
we get the sum of the two short calls.
Also, you can think of these short calls
as flattening out the original long call position we had,
starting at K1.
So the first of those short calls
takes us from an upward sloping line to a flat line
and the second short call brings us to a downward slope
on the sum of the positions.
Then, finally, we're going to take
another long position in a call with a strike price of K2.

And that last position then is going
to flatten out the downward slope that would have continued
if we didn't add it to this, and now we
have another flat segment.

Clearly, this butterfly spread allows
you to make a very precise bet about where the stock price
will be on the expiration date.
What's great about these butterfly spreads is
that you can use them to create just about any payoff pattern
you can think of.
And you can have a larger or smaller position
by scaling things up or down.
Next, let's look at a straddle.
A straddle centered at the current stock price
is a bet on high-priced volatility.
As you can see, the gain increases
the further the stock price moves away
from its current value.
A straddle is created quite simply with a long put
and a long call, both with a strike
price equal to the current stock price.
Notice that on this slide, I'm showing a profit diagram
instead of a payoff diagram.
The profit for each option is the payoff shifted down
by the premium paid.
We can add the profits vertically,
just as we do on payoff diagrams,
to get the red line, which is the net profit.
The profit diagram makes it clear
that unless the volatility is sufficiently high,
the profit will turn out to be negative.
You probably can also see there's
a slight asymmetry between the premium
as it's drawn for the put and call options
with the same strike price.
In general, the premium for the call will be higher.
And that's something you can also
prove using put-call parity.
The last strategy we'll look at it's called a strangle.
Like a straddle, a strangle is also a bet on high volatility
and consists of one long put and one long call.
What's different is that the strike price, K0 on the put,
is lower than the strike price, K1 on the call.
That creates a larger region where the profit is negative
but the largest possible loss is somewhat smaller.
You'll get some more practice with these various positions
in the recitation and also in some of the homework questions.