
INSTRUCTOR: Let's turn to the important topic
of risk-neutral pricing.
If you look back to the general approach
for finding a replicating portfolio
to price an option on slide 32, you'll
see that none of the formulas involve
the true probability, q, of the stock price going up at time 1
on the binomial tree.
The natural question is whether this
means that those actual probabilities really
don't affect option prices.
The answer is yes and no.
Mechanically, we don't need the probabilities
because we valued options by matching
the payoffs of the options and the replicating portfolios
in each of the possible future states of the world
individually, using the information
in the binomial tree about stock prices and the risk free rate.

However, the physical probability, q
determines future stock prices and their volatility.
Given a risk adjusted discount rate for the stock,
it also determines the current stock price.
Hence, the current stock price reflects
the probability distribution of future stock prices.
Now since option values depend on the current stock price, S0,
the probability does in fact influence the option value
but it only does so indirectly.

The fact that there's no direct dependence
on the physical probability, q is the basis
for being able to use the trick of risk-neutral pricing
as an alternative to finding the replicating portfolio.

Risk-neutral pricing is a mathematical alternative
to a replicating portfolio approach to pricing options
that's often simpler to work with.
Because the true or physical probability, q,
of an up step in the tree is not used in the pricing formulas
based on portfolio replication, we're
free to replace that probability with the so-called risk-neutral
probability.
The risk-neutral probability is chosen
to be as if we live in a risk-neutral world
where all cash flows are discounted at a risk-free rate,
including those for risky stocks and derivative securities
like options and futures.
That is, we can find the risk-neutral neutral
probability, which we'll call q*,
by solving for it in a formula that equates the stock price
with the present value of the time 1 cash flows on the stock,
discounted at the risk free rate.
For instance, doing this in our last example
would replace the true discount rate of 19%
with the risk free rate of 11%.

There still is actually a risk adjustment,
but it's accomplished through the distorted probability
weights by using q* instead of q.
Here's the present value calculation.
And now we can rearrange that formula and solve for q*
in terms of the stock prices on all of the nodes
of our binomial tree and the risk-free rate.

We can represent the time 0 stock price as the expectation
of the discounted future payoffs on the stock,
but under the risk-neutral expectation operator,
E* that uses risk-neutral probabilities in place
of the physical ones.

The advantage of this approach is
that we can now price any derivative security on a stock
by calculating the derivative's expected payoff
using risk-neutral probabilities in place
of physical probabilities, and discounting
at the risk free rate.
That idea is summarized by formula one here.
Going back to our previous example where the stock price
is 50 at time 0, and either 70 or 35 in one period,
and with the risk free rate of 11%,
we can solve for q* using the formula we derived for it.

We know that the call option has a payoff of 20 on the up node
and is worth 0 on the down node.
We can now find its price by finding
the risk-neutral expectation of the option's value at time 1,
and discounting it back at the risk free rate to time 0.

The result is exactly the same as what
we calculated with the replicating portfolio approach.
The call is worth 10.6547.
Now if you ever find a small difference
when you compare your answers between the two approaches,
it will be due to rounding error in your calculations,
not any true difference in the answers.
Mathematically, the two approaches
are completely equivalent.
Here's a recipe that summarizes what
we've learned about risk neutral pricing of European style
derivatives on a binomial tree.
We start by assuming counter factually
that prices are determined by discounting
at a risk-free rate.
This is often described as assuming a fictional world
where people are risk-neutral Then
based on the model of the evolution of stock
prices and the risk free rate, we
infer the risk-neutral probabilities.
We can then use these probabilities
to compute the price of any derivative security
based on taking the risk-neutral expectation of the payoffs,
and discounting at the risk-free rate.
This recipe is easily extended to the multi-step trees that
will start to look at next, and to other approaches to pricing,
including Monte Carlo methods, that we'll
be touching on in a few weeks.
