
PROFESSOR: Clearly, it's impossible to accurately model
the future distribution of stock prices
or derivative payoffs using a two-point distribution
and we wouldn't expect that model
to do a good job of pricing derivatives.
Luckily, we can extend the ideas we've
developed for one-step trees to trees
with an arbitrarily large number of steps and by doing so,
capture the distribution of outcomes much more accurately.
The general idea of how to do pricing
on a multi-step binomial tree can be most easily understood
using a two-step tree.
In the tree here, we've started with the original tree
from our last example and extended it out
one more period.
If at time 1, for instance, the stock price
is at the up node at 70, we're going
to assume that it will be either 100 or 50 the next period.
Starting at the down node at time 1,
where the stock price equals 35, we'll now assume that at time 2
it will go up to 50 or down to 25.

For now, we're taking this tree as given but,
as I mentioned before, in practice we would calibrate it
based on a statistical analysis of the underlying stock
returns.
Also notice that we chose the outcomes
starting at 70 at time 1 and going down and also
the outcome starting at 35 and going up to be identical.

Restricting the evolution of stock prices
to ensure that this is the case creates what's
called a recombining tree.
That restriction is typically imposed because it greatly
simplifies calculations but it's not absolutely necessary.
We'll now use this tree to price a European call
option with a strike price of 50 that expires at time 2.
We'll continue to assume a risk-free rate
of 11% per period on a continuous basis.

We'll price the option working backwards on the tree
to find its value on every node.
Starting at time 2, the option is only
in the money at the top on the up-up node
where the payoff is the stock price of 100
minus the $50 strike price so the payoff on the call option
is 50.

The middle node has a stock price of 50
and there is no gain from exercising the option.
And at the bottom node, the call option is clearly
out-of-the-money.
Now at each time 1 node we can compute the option value as we
did with the one-step tree, by first finding the risk-neutral
probability of an up-move, q*, based on the one-period subtree
and then applying the probabilities to the option
payoffs of 50 in the up state and 0 in the down-state at time
2.

This is our subtree and we're going
to find the call option at time 1 in the up state
by discounting these two payoffs weighted by the risk
neutral probability.
Well, that yields the call price at time 1
on the up node C1u of 25.2083.
In the same way on the time 1 down node,
we can find the call option value
by looking at the one-step subproblem.

On that node we don't have to do any math
because if the payoffs at time 2 are all 0,
we know the value of the call option at time 1
will also be 0.
Now going back the last step to time 0 and again solving
the one-step subproblem, we find a q* at time 0 of 0.5947.
Apply it to the call option at time 1
in the up state to get the expected
time 1 value of the call option, and then
we discount it back at the risk-free rate,
and we come to the conclusion that the call
option is worth 13.4294.
