
INSTRUCTOR: An American option differs
from an otherwise identical European option
in that it can be exercised at any time
on or before its expiration date.
That additional flexibility implies that an American option
has to be at least as valuable as its European counterpart,
and it may be more valuable.
American options are very common, as this list shows.
I'll highlight just a few of these items, many of which
we'll cover in more detail later in the class.
Individual exchange traded stock options are typically American,
as are some index options such as the one on the S&P 100
that's traded at the Chicago Board Options Exchange.
An option to enter into an interest rate swap
at a preset fixed rate is called a swaption.
This very popular type of option is
sold in the over-the-counter market,
and is generally American style.
Embedded options, as the name suggests,
are embedded in other contracts.
These are very common.
American style embedded options are
found in some but not all callable and puttable bonds,
in mortgages, and in convertible bonds.
The term real options refers to options relating
to physical investment choices, such as the option
to wait to close down a plant, or to wait before starting
to construct a new building.
These are often analyzed using options pricing methods
for American style options.
Although American options can be early exercised,
we know in some instances that they shouldn't be.
Knowing that is helpful because it allows
us to use European options pricing formulas
like the Black-Scholes-Merton model
for some American options.
One prominent example is an American call
on a stock that won't pay a dividend before the expiration
date.
Such an option is always worth more alive than dead.
The intuition for this is that early exercise
means we make the payment of the strike price
sooner, which increases its present value, and that's bad.
We also lose the protection from the risk
that the value falls below the strike price.
In other words, exercising the option
early extinguishes the valuable insurance value of the option.
Well what if the option is in-the-money
and you don't want to keep the option for any longer?
You still shouldn't exercise it.
Instead, you should just sell it in the open market.
Now that analysis for an American call
changes for stocks that will pay a dividend
before the expiration of the option.
Now waiting to exercise also has two disadvantages.
If you wait to exercise, you don't get the dividend,
and the stock price is going to drop
by the amount of the dividend, making it less likely
that the call is going to be in the money in the future.
Early exercise avoids these disadvantages,
but at the cost of time value and losing the remaining option
value.
Therefore, what the optimal decision
will be depends on the specifics of the situation.
For American put options, whether or not
to early exercise also depends on several factors that
pull in different directions, so that the answer
will differ depending on the specific situation.
The advantage of early exercising
is that we receive the strike price K sooner,
which, because of time value, increases the present value
of the payment.
An offsetting disadvantage is that we
lose the right to any dividends paid after we exercise,
but before expiration.
Furthermore, we destroy the insurance value
of the put option.
That's described on the side as having given up
a stock for K that may have been worth more than K
in the future.
As for the call option on a dividend paying stock,
we'll have to figure out the best strategy involving
whether and when to early exercise at the same time
as we're valuing the option.
To start to see how to incorporate
the strategic decision of whether and when
to exercise into evaluation framework,
consider this example.
It's May 11, and your longest September put option
on the S&P 100 index with a strike price of K equals 740.
The S&P 100 on may 11th stands at 689.83.
The option is currently in-the-money by a little more
than 7% of the index value.
Do you exercise immediately or keep the option alive?
The general procedure is going to be
to compare the value of immediate exercise, which
in this case is 7% of the index value,
with the value of the option if it's kept alive
under the current conditions.
The decision rule then is to exercise
if and only if the payoff from exercising immediately--
the strike price minus the stock index price--
exceeds the discounted value of the future distribution
of payoffs if you wait.
Valuing options on binomial trees
makes it easy to systematically evaluate the optimal exercise
strategy in this situation.
Here's a detailed example of how to do this.
The binomial tree here is based on a stock
that's currently valued at 100.
Each time step of the tree represents six months,
so the tree covers a total period of one year.
The interest rate is 2% on a continuous basis.
The vertical spacing of the nodes on the tree
has been chosen to match a stock price volatility of 30%.
We'll talk more about how to do this sort of calibration
next week, but for now we'll just take the stock price tree
as given.
Also, we'll take as given the implication of the assumptions
used here to construct the tree that the risk-neutral
probability of an up move on the tree, q*,
is equal to 0.4707 at every single node of the tree.
The tree was constructed by multiplying each previous stock
price by an up multiplier of 1.2363,
and to get the next down node by multiplying the stock
price by 1 over 1.2363.
Now consider a put option with an at-the-money strike
price of 100.
We'll actually start here by pricing the European version
of the option, which doesn't require any strategic decision
about early exercise, but serves as a review of pricing
European options on a two step tree.
As always, we start at the final date,
i equals 2 here, and compute the payoffs at each node.
If the stock price is 152.847, or 100,
the option is out-of or at-the-money
and so is worth nothing.
At the bottom node, 100 minus 65.425
equals 34.575, which is the value
of the put option at that node.

Now we can use the risk neutral probability, q*, of 0.4707,
and the risk-free rate of 2% to find the discounted value
of the put at each node working backwards pairwise
on the subtrees.
That exercise implies a time 0 value of the put of 9.495.
Now let's consider the value of the put option
if it's American, with everything else the same
as just described.
At expiration at i equals 2, the payoffs
are the same as with the European case,
which is 0 on the top and middle nodes,
and 34.575 on the down down node.
Stepping back to i equals 1, we need
to compare the value of waiting with the value
of immediate exercise.
The value of waiting at each node
can be read off of the calculations
we did for the European version of the option
on the last slide.
Turning to the i equals 1 up node,
the stock price of 123 exceeds the strike price,
and the put option is out-of-the-money so we would
never early exercise it.
At the i equals 1 down node, here's
where things get interesting.
If we exercise immediately, we get the strike of 100
minus the stock price of 80.886, for an immediate payoff
of 19.114.
If we wait, the value is less at 18.119.
We conclude that it's better to exercise immediately.
Finally, we can go back to time 0,
where the option is at-the-money and so it's
clearly better to wait.
We find the time 0 price to be 10.017
based on knowing that we won't early exercise at the time 1
up node but that we will early exercise at the time 1
down node.
The calculations for i equals zero and i
equals 1 are highlighted on this sub tree for you to look at.
At each node, we compare the value of immediate exercise
with the value of keeping the option alive.
Note the value of keeping an option alive
will depend on what we concluded on any future nodes
about whether or not to early exercise.
By working backwards, we're able to take into account
all of the relevant future strategic decisions
on each node.
Comparing the results, the American option
is worth 10.017, which is more than what
we found for the European version of the option, which
was worth 9.495.
The difference, of course, is because of what
happens at the i equals 1 down node,
where there's an extra benefit from early exercise.
