
We can easily extend our two step example
to an arbitrarily large number of steps on a tree.
That extension allows us to more accurately capture
the distribution of future stock prices
and the corresponding option payoffs.
In the subscript pairs here, ij, we'll
let i denote the time period and j denote
the node with the highest node labeled as node one.
Using risk neutral probabilities,
we can solve backwards for the value of any European style
derivative as we did in the two period case
discounting pairwise expected values one period ahead back
to the current node.
The procedure is similar for American style derivatives
except that at each node, we also
have to check whether or not we want to early exercise.
When early exercise is optimal, the value at that node
reflects that choice.
And it can affect the value as we work
backwards through the tree.
We'll return to multi-step trees and how they're
calibrated in the next lecture and also
use them to explain one way to derive the Black-Scholes Merton
options pricing formula.
I've been using risk-neutral pricing in most of the examples
here for its simplicity but I want to again emphasize
that we would have come to the same answers using
the formulas for creating a replicating portfolio.
It's important to remember that risk-neutral pricing does not
mean that people are risk-neutral
or that they don't care about the considerable risk
of options, which is a reflection of the fact
that there are equivalent to a leveraged position
in the risky underlying stock.
Risk-neutral pricing works by replacing
the cost of risk in our usual discount rate
with an adjustment in the risk-neutral probabilities.
That adjustment means that the risk-neutral probabilities
have information, not just about the probability
of different outcomes, but also about the price of risk
associated with those outcomes.
For a stock price tree, the risk-neutral probability, q*,
will turn out to be less than the physical probability, q,
which has the effect of putting more weight on lower stock
price realizations reflecting that the true discount rate is
higher than the risk-free rate.
Finally, binomial pricing has been
shown to work for pricing American options
where exercise decisions today will
depend on what we think those decisions will
be in the future.
There's no simple alternative to using
backward induction on trees for pricing American options.
And luckily, as we extend the tree to many steps,
a binomial approach can often produce
a very accurate estimate of a derivatives value.
