PROFESSOR: So AT&T's acquisition of DirecTV--
what is DirecTV?
So DirecTV is a satellite TV provider.
So instead of getting cable from a company like Comcast,
you put a satellite dish on your house or on your apartment,
and the TV comes to you through that satellite dish
rather than through the cable.
Second question is, why was AT&T,
which is the phone company, why was it interested in DirecTV?
So AT&T, at this time, was an internet provider.
So it could provide internet, but it could not provide TV.
So the thought was if AT&T and DirecTV got together, AT&T
would have internet customers.
DirecTV it would have TV customers.
They could cross-sell each other's customers
and increase their mutual profits.
In addition, AT&T wanted to diversify.
And they wanted to compete with people like Comcast that
already had both TV and internet.
So what was AT&T's alternative to purchasing DirecTV?
Well, [? it ?] could have just done nothing.
But if it wants TV, in theory, with work and expense,
it could have developed a TV capability internally.
Or it could have bought Dish or somebody
like that, which was a different satellite TV company.
Or it could have bought Comcast, which was a cable TV company.
So it had alternatives, but it decided that it
was going to buy DirecTV.

Now, some facts on the acquisition.
How much did AT&T pay for DirecTV?
And how do they finance the acquisition?
So this is a big acquisition.
AT&T paid $47.8 billion.
It financed the acquisition.
70% of the payment was in stock.
And then 30% of the payment was in cash.
It paid a 38% premium to DirecTV's stock price
prior to the announcement of the acquisition.
In addition to this, as we'll see in a second,
when you buy a company, you get all the assets,
and you assume all the liabilities of the company.
Now, let's just think about DirecTV for a second.
Before the acquisition, as of June 30, 2015,
DirecTV had a Market Value of Equity,
which we abbreviate MVE, it had an MVE of $46.8 million.
Its net assets, which is assets minus liabilities,
or Book Value of Equity, BVE--
it's Book Value of Equity, BVE, was minus $3.4 billion.
Recall that by the balance sheet equation,
equity is net assets or assets minus liabilities.
So there's a $50 billion difference between market value
and book value.
And the question is, how does DirecTV
have such a large market value and such a low book value?
And the answer is, as we talked earlier,
is its intangible assets.
So DirecTV has valuable intangible assets.
The accounting system doesn't allow
you to put those on your balance sheet.
So those valuable intangible assets are off balance sheet.
They're part of the market value,
but they're not part of the book value.
And then in general, intangible assets
include things like intellectual property, so patents,
copyrights, and trademarks.
It includes licenses and franchise rights.
So DirecTV has licenses to operate satellites in space.
DirecTV may have a brand value.
So the value of the DirecTV brand is valuable.
DirecTV has customer lists that are valuable.
We will talk later about how DirecTV has goodwill.
So in this class, in contrast to our discussions
about intangible assets in general, in this class,
we'll see that an acquisition puts a market
value of these intangible assets and then puts
those intangible assets on our balance sheet.
Let's think for a minute about the acquisition price.
So how much did AT&T pay?
So as we talked about before, $47.8 billion.
How is AT&T financing the acquisition?
So partly in stock and partly in cash.
What was DirecTV's book value?
Again, it was minus $3.4 billion.
What is AT&T paying for when it pays that $47.8 billion
for a company that has negative book value of $3.4 billion?
Again, in part, it's these intangible assets,
intellectual property, licenses, brand value,
and customer lists.
And then we'll see in a couple of minutes,
it's also paying for goodwill.
And in this case, it's also paying for control.
It's going to become the sole shareholder of DirecTV.
And controlling an asset is valuable.
So there's some idea that if you buy control of an asset,
you're going to pay a premium for control because you
get to say what the asset does rather
than having individual shareholders control it.
So we pay 38% more than the prevailing stock price.
Why did AT&T pay more than the prevailing stock price?
Well, for one thing--
this is a funny word, synergies.
So when we bring AT&T and DirecTV together,
maybe 1 plus 1 equals 3.
So maybe the combination of the two of them
is worth more than the two separately.
The seller, in this case, DirecTV,
if there's synergies created, the seller's
able to capture some of those synergies.
So part of the premium goes to the seller,
which is DirecTV, for those synergies.
And then finally, as we just talked about,
AT&T is paying a premium for control of DirecTV.