
PROFESSOR: Now we want to talk about goodwill.
So we've talked about it as goodwill
as the part of the purchase price
after you've allocated value to the tangible assets
and liabilities, after you've allocated values
to the intangible, identifiable assets.
So what assets are at least, in principle,
included in the goodwill balance?
So it's intangibles that are not separately identifiable.
And these are things like synergies, which
is, by nature, sort of vague.
A better way to think about synergies
is, if we put AT&T and DirecTV together,
maybe profits will go up in the future.
So these future profit increases, maybe we
have ability to grow in the future,
and we're also acquiring employees.
So what happens to the goodwill going forward?
So, by US GAAP and by IFRS, we're
going to check the goodwill and evaluate it
for impairment annually.
And we'll talk about how this is done in the next slide.
So goodwill impairment is a write down or a reduction
in the value of goodwill.
And we're going to do this if management assesses
that the fair value of the goodwill or the market
value of the goodwill is less than the book value
the goodwill.
And then the intuition for this is just,
as always in this class, it's lower of cost or market.
So the cost of the goodwill is a book value.
We're going to check whether the market value is above or below
the cost of the goodwill.
Where does the fair value of the good will come from?
Well, this is a management estimate.
And it's very hard for outsiders to know
whether managers are estimating these things appropriately
or not.
What happens when goodwill is impaired?
So we're going to write down the value of the goodwill.
So the asset is going to go down in value.
And then we'll have a loss in our income statement.
We'll see some examples of this coming up.
So, coming back to Autonomy, which
was bought by Hewlett-Packard company in 2011,
here's Hewlett-Packard's discussion of the purchase
price allocation.
So Hewlett-Packard's largest acquisition in fiscal 2011
was Autonomy.
Our fair value consideration, so what we paid for Autonomy,
was $11 billion in cash.
And, when we bought it, we recorded $6.6 billion
worth of goodwill.
And then we recorded intangible assets of $4.6 billion.
So, using this little snippet from the financial statements,
we can see that the balance sheet equation
entry was we paid $11 billion in cash for it.
That was the purchase price.
What we got was $6.6 billion in goodwill.
We got $4.6 billion in identifiable intangibles.
And then, to balance the balance sheet equation,
we can figure out that the fair value of net assets
added was minus $0.2 billion.
So everything is fine.
This is 2011.
A year later, also in Hewlett-Packard's
annual report, they say we're writing down
the goodwill associated with the Autonomy reporting unit.
And it's because our projected operating results of Autonomy
include accounting improprieties,
incomplete disclosures, and misrepresentations
at Autonomy that occurred prior to the Autonomy acquisition.
So, in other words, the future profits
that we thought we were going to get from Autonomy
are much lower than they were.
And, because we based our goodwill estimate
on those future profits, we're going
to have to write down or impair the goodwill
to reflect the fact that future profits are much lower
than anticipated.
So let's look at how this plays out
in the balance sheet equation.
So Hewlett-Packard, at the acquisition date,
created $6.6 billion of goodwill related to Autonomy.
It decides that the fair value of that goodwill is zero.
Remember, we're writing down $8.8 billion.
Where's the rest of that?
Or the $2.2 billion is probably coming
from identifiable or amortizable purchased intangible assets.
So our balance sheet equation entries
are we write down the goodwill asset by $6.6 billion.
We take an impairment charge in income of $6.6 billion.
We write down the intangible assets by $2.2 billion.
And we take an impairment charge on the intangible assets
of $2.2 billion.
So that's example one.
So HP ended up overpaying for Autonomy
because, at least as HP alleges, Autonomy was committing fraud.
Once Hewlett-Packard understood the fraud,
they had to write down the value of the Autonomy investment.
Here's another one that's more recent.
So, back in 2005, Procter & Gamble
bought Gillette, which is the shaving business.
OK, now they're writing down the value of the Gillette brand
by $8 billion.
And the executives attributed this write down
to lower shaving frequency.
Now does this make sense?
So, if you look around, at least in the US,
probably half of men of shaving age have beards now.
So they don't shave anymore, OK?
And so Gillette finds that the market for shaving products
has shrunk by 11% the past five years.
It's got competition from internet companies like Dollar
Shave Club and Harry's.
And, as a result of this, its sales
have declined in 11 of 12 quarters.
So sales come down.
Profits come down.
That means that the value of that goodwill
comes down as well.
So here's how P&G reflects this in its income statement.
So we've got this is a December 2019 income statement.
We've got sales, cost of goods sold, SG&A,
and then the goodwill write down of $8.345 billion.
And then they also show it in their balance sheet
where they show goodwill and intangible assets.
So P&G is a company that's always doing acquisitions.
So it's got beauty segment.
It's got a grooming segment where Gillette is.
It's got health care, feminine care, et cetera.
And all this growth came through acquisitions with goodwill.
And P&G is showing you how it writes down
the value of goodwill by $6.7 billion in 2019.
Now, coming back briefly to DirecTV,
this is an article from 2018 CNBC that
talks about how DirecTV reported a staggering loss of 350,000
net subscribers.
This quarterly net loss is about 2%
of total subscribers at that time.
And, if we annualize it, then it's about 8%
on an annualized basis.
And, of course, we know why this is happening.
Because consumers or viewers, they're cutting the cord.
They don't want TV packages.
They don't want cable.
They don't want DirecTV.
They want cheaper streaming video like Netflix and Hulu.
Now, because of this, you might expect an impairment of DirecTV
goodwill, but, at least through 2019, this has not happened.
So, even though the news on the DirecTV unit is bad,
management still hasn't written down the DirecTV goodwill.
And, remember, this is a management estimate,
and this impairment is somewhat discretionary.