
PROFESSOR: So for the remainder of this class,
we're going to talk about financial investments.
And we'll come at the end of this section
to realize that acquisitions are a special case
of financial investments.
But we're going to broaden our focus a little bit.
So our remaining agenda is to talk about when accounting
departs from transactions-based or historical cost model
and moves towards market-driven valuations.
We're going to talk about how financial investments are
valued on company's balance sheet
and how these financial investments affect the income
statement and cash flow statement
when there are valuation adjustments.
So backing up to earlier in the course,
so we talked about a variety of transactions related to assets.
And we've talked about implicitly
when and how are the market value of assets reflected
in financial statements.
Let's go back and do an example of PP&E. Let's
pretend like on the 1st of January, 2000,
Delta buys an airplane for $20 million.
And let's assume for simplicity that it has no salvage value
and a 10-year useful life.
So what transactions does it record in 2000?
So cash is going to go down by $20 million.
We're going to put the plane on our balance sheet
at $20 million.
What else is going to happen?
We're going to charge depreciation of $20 million
divided by 10 years.
So depreciation expense will be $2 million a year.
Accumulated depreciation will go up.
And then we'll have the expense for $2 million,
a depreciation expense.
Now a year later, let's pretend that Delta sells
this airplane for $20 million.
What's going to happen then?
We're going to get $20 million worth of cash.
What's going to happen to PP&E?
It's going to go down by $20 million.
What's going to happen to accumulated depreciation?
It's going to go down by $2 million.
And then we'll solve for the gain or loss.
So cash goes up.
Property, plant, and equipment goes down.
Accumulated depreciation goes down.
So we're getting cash, $20 million,
for an asset that has a net book value of $18 million.
So we're going to have a $2 million
gain on this transaction.
So notice at the beginning, we involved the market value
of the plane.
So we bought the plane for its market value at $20 million
at the time.
And at the end when we sell the airplane for $20 million,
we're also reflecting a change in market value.
But it's in the middle before the time
that we bought the PP&E and the time of the sale
that things get complicated.
Under US GAAP, the way that we handle this complication
is the lower of cost or market rule, or LCM.
So lower cost or market just says,
if the market value of an asset is
less than the book value of an asset,
then the firm must reduce the book value of the asset
and recognize a loss in the income statement.
And remember, we talked about this
in terms of the impairment of property, plant, and equipment.
So if the market value of property, plant, and equipment
is less than its book value, we impair the book value
of the asset.
And we recognize an impairment loss in the income statement.
On the other hand, under US GAAP,
if the market value of the asset goes above its book value,
we don't have to do any accounting transaction.
In fact, we cannot do any accounting transaction.
So PP&E is an example.
Inventory's another example.
In this part of this class, we're
going to talk about one set of accounting transactions
that deviate from lower costs or market principle, which
is passively owned financial assets.
So what are financial investments?
So some of you are familiar with common stock.
So you can buy stock in companies.
This is also called equity.
Companies often issue bonds.
So you can buy corporate bonds, which
are bonds issued by companies.
There are also government bonds, which are
bonds issued by governments.
It could be the US government.
It could be other governments.
It could be state governments.
And the accounting questions here is, number one,
should we recognize changes in the market value
of these financial investments on our balance sheet?
Now, notice the intuition for why we should is
that a lot of these things are traded in liquid markets.
And you can just look up the value
of a common stock in the newspaper or on the internet--
so makes sense to put market values of financial instruments
on our balance sheet.
And if the second question is yes, if we should put them
on our balance sheet, the second question is,
should we put changes in market value on our income statement?
Just as an aside as to how important financial investments
are to certain companies, let's look at this company.
So this is their balance sheet as of July of 2017.
Notice that this company has cash and cash equivalents
and short-term investments of about 16--
of about 20% of its assets.
And then it's got long-term investments of about 50%
of its assets.
So in total, this company has over 70% of its assets
in investments or in financial investments.
And when you guess what company is this,
you would think of it as maybe this is a bank,
or maybe it's an insurance company.
But this is actually Apple.
So Apple, which is a big computer manufacturer, almost
all of its on-balance sheet assets
are financial investments.
And then as an aside, why does a company like Apple
have so many financial investments?
So part of it is we're generating excess cash.
We might have that cash on hand for financial flexibility.
Things might go bad.
So we have rainy day money.
We might have it on hand to fund future R&D.
So lots of technology companies and drug companies,
when they come public initially, they raise all this money.
And then they keep this money on their balance sheet
to fund their money-losing operations until such time
ideally as they will start making money.
And then another big thing-- and this is what's going on with
Apple--
is because of tax considerations,
lots of US companies have cash that is trapped overseas.
Another reason for it is--
and we saw this with Amazon, building up cash so
that they could buy Whole Foods-- is maybe
were just saving cash, because we're going
to make a long-term investment.
We're going to buy another company.
We're going to expand.
Or we're going to do a strategic investment.