PROFESSOR: Now I want to spend a minute now talking
about this picture of all the types of financial investments
you can have.
So on the left box, it shows ownership.
And the question is, does the company own less than 50%,
or does it own more than 50% on the bottom?
If you own less than 50%, do you own less than 24%
which is called a passive investment,
or do you own more than 20%, which
is called an investment with significant influence?
So the first thing we're going to talk about here
is passive investments that are accounted
for is either trading investments
or available for sale investments.
Those investments are going to be fair-valued on our balance
sheet.
And then later on in this session,
we'll talk about the other types of investments,
which will not be fair-valued on our balance sheet.
So passive investments according to financial accounting
standard 115, now modified by accounting standard 2016-01,
requires a firm to classify its investments
into three categories.
And these are based on the intent of the firm that
inquired these investments.
Number one is held-to-maturity.
So if you buy a bond, and you intend
to hold that bond to maturity, and you have the ability
to hold that bond to maturity, you
can ask for accounting for it to be held-to-maturity accounting.
Trading securities, which can be either debt or equity,
are securities that you acquire for short-term profit
potential.
An available for sale, which is debt only,
is securities that are not classified
as either of the above.
And as a note, and we'll come back
to this, until recently equity could be also classified
as available for sale.
So the accounting for these is held-to-maturity,
has no balance sheet effect, and therefore
no income statement of fact.
So held-to-maturity, which is only for debt,
is attractive because fluctuations
in the market value's security don't show up
until you sell the security.
Available for sale, there is a balance sheet effect--
question one is yes--
but there's no income statement effect--
question two is no.
We'll see how this works in a second.
And then trading securities, which
can be both debt and equity, there's
both a balance sheet effect and an income statement effect.
So what this shows then if you look at this matrix
is that changes in market value affect the balance
sheet for both available for sale and for trading
securities, but only affect the income statement
for trading securities.
So this is kind of all, you need to know
about the accounting for this.
So this slide is a useful piece of information
to keep handy say like for an exam or something like that.