PROFESSOR: Let's talk about accounting now for available
for sale.
So we're going to use the same examples.
Eva buys 100 Attila bonds for $100,000, gets a dividend.
Available for sale and trading securities
give identical treatment for purchase and receipts
of dividends.
So this accounting is exactly alike.
Now, the difference is going to be here.
Now the bonds have gone up by $5,000.
So marketable securities is going to go up by $5,000.
But we want to keep this gain off of our income statement.
So we're not going to put it in a retained earnings.
We're going to put it in the holding tank, which
is other comprehensive income.
So we have an increase in value on our balance sheet.
But that increase in value does not show up in income
because we're putting it in other comprehensive income.

So prior to the sale available for sale securities,
increases in value are not in retained earnings.
They're not in income.
Instead, we're keeping them in other comprehensive income.

A year later, the bond price has dropped.
So the value of the bonds is $102,000.
We're going to draw marketable securities.
And again, to balance the balance sheet equation,
we're going to put the amount into
other comprehensive income.

And then finally, the bonds are worth $111,000.
Eva is going to sell all these bonds.
And notice this is very similar to the sale of property, plant,
and equipment.
We're going to recognize cash.
We're going to close the balance of marketable securities.
We're going to close the balance of other comprehensive income,
and then we're going to solve for the gain or the loss
on the transaction.
So cash goes up by $111,000.
We close out marketable securities of $102,000.
We close out other comprehensive income of $2,000,
and then we solve for the realized gain of $11,000.
And notice that this realized gain
is $9,000 that we made in 2006 plus the $2,000
that we made in prior years that we had stored
in other comprehensive income.
So that illustrates the difference
between accounting for trading securities
and accounting for available for sale securities.