PROFESSOR: Now we're going to talk about the equity method.
So going back to our chart, remember we've just
looked at passive investments.
We talked about how to account for trading securities,
how they appear on our balance sheet, changes in value,
and how those changes in value appear in retained earnings
and net income.
We talked about passive investments,
in terms of available for sale, how those changes in values
are going to appear on our assets
and are going to appear in other comprehensive income.
And those passive investments occur
if the company owns less than 20% of the stock or the bond.
Now we're going to talk about significant influence, where
you own more than 20% of the stock or the bond
but own less than 50%.
Once you own 50%, you have control
and we're going to consolidate.
Note that while trading securities
and available for sale securities
are carried on our balance sheet at fair value,
investments that are accounted for under the equity method
and under the consolidation method
are carried on our balance sheet at historic cost.
So let's look for significant influence
and look at the equity method.
So the equity method says, if a firm
exerts significant influence over the firm
that it's investing in, then the firm must use the equity
market.
So if you own more than 20% but less than 50%,
that implies that you have significant influence.
But you can have significant influence with less than 20%,
say, like if you have a board seat.
And just an example to motivate this,
Gilead, the pharmaceutical company,
says it's going to invest $1.1 billion
to increase its stake in the drug maker Galapagos.
And it's going to increase its stake to 22% from 12.3%.
And notice it is paying a premium over the average market
price to do this.
So it's going to now have influence over Galapagos.
It's going to get two seats on Galapagos board of directors.
And because of this, it has to pay
a premium in the marketplace.
So that's his motivation.
Now what we want to do is talk about the accounting
for this, which is called the equity method.
So there are four steps to the equity method.
And we'll work through a big example
of this in just a second.
So you initially record the investment at how much
you paid for it, the acquisition cost.
And then, when you have dividends or earnings,
you're going to adjust the book value of the investment
by our share, the investor's share of the dividends
and earnings.
And then we're going to record the investor's share of profit
on our income statement.
But dividends, unlike trading securities and unlike available
for sale securities, they're not going to have income effects.
But they're going to reduce our investment.
They do not give rise to dividend income.
So let's now look at an example.
So here's the equity method example.
So on January 1, 2010 Zsa Zsa purchased 1,000 shares
of Zoltan for $15 in cash.
And when it bought us 1,000 shares,
it represents a 30% ownership interest in Zoltan.
At the time, Zoltan's book value per share was $10.
Zsa Zsa is paying a premium.
It's paying $15 instead of $10 because it thinks
that Zoltan has some patents.
And those patents are not on the balance sheet,
but they're worth $5 a share.
The patents have a life of 10 years.
On June 30, 2010, Zsa Zsa got a dividend of $1 a share.
On December 31, 2010, Zoltan's common stock price
had risen to $13 per share.
And also on December 31, 2010, Zoltan reports its earnings
as $20,000.
And then in the final thing, on June 30, 2011,
Zsa Zsa is going to sell the shares of Zoltan
for $17 a share.
So let's work through each of these steps
in a stepwise fashion.
So the first one is we buy the shares on January 1, 2010.
So we buy 1,000 shares at $15 a share.
And this is a 30% interest in Zoltan,
so that it's greater than the 20% threshold
but less than the 50% threshold.
So we have to use equity method accounting.
So when we buy it, how much cash goes out?
So $15 times 1,000.
Cash goes down by $15,000.
Our investment in Zoltan goes up by $15,000 as well.
Second transaction, we receive a dividend of $1 a share.
So remember we have 1,000 shares.
So we get $1,000 worth of cash.
Now, remember, if this were a trading security,
we would recognize dividend income.
And if this were an available for sale security,
we'd also recognize dividend income.
But with equity method, the difference
is we're going to reduce our investment
by the amount of the dividend.
So cash goes up, and our investment goes down.
So we have a return on capital on our investment, so to speak.
On December 31, market price of Zoltan is $13 a share.
Under the equity method, there's no accounting here.
So if this were a trading security
or if this were available for sale,
we would increase our investment, our asset,
to reflect the fact that the price has gone up.
But under equity method we're essentially
using historical cost, so we do not change
the value of our investment.
Then, Zoltan reports its earnings as $20,000.
So let's remember we own 30% of this security.
So we're going to get a 30% share of our earnings.
So $6,000, that increases our investment,
and that's going to be income for us.
That's going to increase our retained earnings.
And we're calculating that as $20,000 worth of earnings
times our 30% share.
Recall that Zoltan has $5 a share in unrecorded patents.
And this $5 a share is part of Zsa Zsa's investment.
And then, we're going to amortize
the unrecorded patents.
So the patents are worth $5 a share.
We're going to amortize them over 10 years.
So $5 a share divided by 10 years is $0.50 a share.
And then we have 1,000 shares, so we're
going to amortize the cost of these patents.
They're going to reduce our investment
and they're going to reduce our retained earnings by $500.
Finally-- but before we get to that
finally, remember when we looked at Facebook earlier
in this class, we saw that Facebook
was including the amortization of intangibles.
If Facebook had not bought 100% of WhatsApp,
as we saw that they did--
but if they bought 30% of it at the same price,
the amortization would be 30% of this number.
So that's just a link back to acquisition accounting.
The final step is that Zsa Zsa is
going to sell 1,000 shares of Zoltan for $17 a share.
So 1,000 shares times $17 gives us cash of $17,000.
We are going to reduce our investment.
So we no longer own the Zoltan.
So we're going to pull out the 19,500 total investment we
have at Zoltan at this point.
And then we're going to take a $2,500 loss on that investment.
So that's a comprehensive example
of how to do the equity method.