
PROFESSOR: Final thing we want to do is consolidation.
So we've done less than 20% ownership, which is passive.
We've done 20% to 50% ownership, which is equity method.
Once we get over 50%, we're thought to control the firm,
and we're going to consolidate it.
So we'll work through this in a second,
but essentially what happens in consolidation accounting is
we're going to replace the investment
balance with the investee's assets and liabilities.
We're going to replace the firm's portion of reported
income of the investee with the investee's sales and expenses.
And then if the investee and the investor
sell stuff to each other, we're going
to eliminate intercorporate transactions.
Looking back to AT&T's acquisition of DIRECTV,
remember that this is what DIRECTV's balance sheet looked
like after the acquisition adjustments.
AT&T's unconsolidated balance sheet after the acquisition
reflects that it made a $48 billion investment in DIRECTV
and paid for it with $14 billion in cash and $33 billion
in stock.

The first two columns of this slide
shows the previous unconsolidated balance sheets
of AT&T and DIRECTV.
The third column shows the consolidating adjustments.
We eliminate the investment in DIRECTV,
and we eliminate DIRECTV's book value.
Then we add all of DIRECTV's other assets and liabilities.
The final column then shows the consolidated balance sheets
of AT&T.
Now, a simpler example is this.
So let's suppose a parent owns 100% of a subsidiary,
so this is similar to our DIRECTV example.
So the parent shown in the far left column
has $10,000 of current assets.
It has the investment in the subsidiary.
It's got total assets of $24,000.
It's got liabilities of $8,000, which
are a third of total assets, or 33% of total assets.
It's got some contributed capital.
It's got some retained earnings.
And then again, its total liabilities and equities
are $24,000.
The subsidiary has total assets of $8,000,
of which half of those total assets
are book value in terms of contributed capital
and retained earnings.
Now, when we consolidate these, we're
going to eliminate the investment in the sub,
we're going to eliminate the subsidiary stockholders'
equity, so those are the consolidated adjustments,
and then we're just going to add across.
And notice that we're adding all the assets of the subsidiary,
and we're adding all the liabilities of the subsidiary,
and the effect of this is to raise our leverage measured
by liabilities to total assets.
We're going to raise that leverage
amount from 33% to 43%.
So now let's think about what happens
if the parent doesn't own 100% of the subsidiaries
in our last two examples.
So what happens if the parent owns less than 100%
of the subsidiary?
So we're going to continue to consolidate.
We control the subsidiary.
We're going to continue to consolidate,
but we're going to create this account called
non-controlling interest and equity of subsidiary
to represent the part that we don't control.
And then on our income statement,
we're also going to have a line item that's
called non-controlling interest and earnings of subsidiary.
Now, it's important to note here,
as with many things in accounting,
different firms are going to use different words.
So non-controlling interest is what
we're going to look at here, but you'll often
see the words minority interest, and non-controlling interest
and minority interest mean the exact same things
as each other.
So understand the concept, and then the vocabulary
will come along with it.
So going back to our earlier example,
now let's pretend that the parent owns only 50%
of the subsidiary.
And to do this in this context of this example,
we're going to pretend that the parent sells
50% of the subsidiary to somebody else.
So now the parent has $2,000 more cash
and that it's investment in the subsidiary is $2,000 less.
Then when we consolidate, so the column
showing consolidating adjustments,
we're going to remove the $2,000 investment in the subsidiary.
We're going to get rid of contributed capital.
We're going to get rid of retained earnings
of the subsidiary, but then we're
going to add this line item called non-controlling interest
that shows that somebody else owns half of our subsidiary.
And know what this did to our leverage ratio
because we're only consolidating half of those subsidiaries,
so to speak.
Our leverage ratio is only going to be 40% of assets as opposed
to 43% of assets in the prior slide.
Let's suppose now that we only own 49% of the subsidiary.
And to get here, we're just going
to adjust the prior slide.
We're going to pretend that the parent sells
1% of the subsidiary for $40 in cash.
So cash goes up by $40.
Investment in subsidiary goes down by $40.
Now, if the parent owns 49% of the sub,
are we now using consolidation--
are we now using consolidated accounting?
The answer is no because we don't own 50% any longer.
We only own 49%.
So now we're going to use equity method accounting
so that nothing comes on to our balance sheet,
as you can see in those adjustments
there, except for the investment in the sub.
And then notice now that the subsidiary, which
is more highly levered than the parent company is, none
of the subsidiary's liabilities come on balance sheet,
so our leverage ratio drops to 33%.
And this is what's known as Coca-Cola's 49% solution.
There's a little article about this here.
So Doug Ivester, who was the Chief Financial
Officer of Coke in 1986, devised the 49% solution.
And the 49% solution is instead of having control
of the bottling company and consolidating the assets
and liabilities on the balance sheet,
we're going to just take it back just a little bit
and have only 49% of the ownership,
so we no longer have to consolidate.
So we no longer put the assets and liabilities
on the balance sheet.
So the bottom line of the article there is here's
the magic.
By reducing its investments from 50% to 49%,
Coke lost billions in debt and a low-return, capital-hungry
business off of its books.
So this is creative accounting as practiced by Coca-Cola
in trying to get equity method accounting, which
is more favorable than consolidation accounting.