
PROFESSOR: In this example, we will conduct an event study
for dividend announcements.
Consider the following for stocks.
The first stock on December 13, 1996 declared a dividend
of $0.10 per share.
Notice that the previous dividend they omitted.
The second stock on November 4, 2003
declared an increase in dividend from $0.06 per share
the quarter before to $0.12 per share.
The third company on December 18, 2013
declared a special dividend of $0.41 per share.
And finally, the last company on February 19, 2015
initiated a dividend of $0.05 per share.
Here we have the other returns on these four stocks
around the time they made these dividends announcements.
For each of the stocks, I highlighted the dates
when they made the corresponding announcement
in this orange color.
So this is first stock, for second stock, for third stock.
This is for the fourth stock.
We have returns on the stocks in column I.
We also have the returns on the markets
on the same dates in column J.
First, let me compute the abnormal return, which
I will define as the difference between the return on the stock
minus the market return.
And I will call this column AR, which
stands for the abnormal return.
So this is the return on the stock in excess of the market.

Next, let us compute the average abnormal return
across these four stocks on the announcement date.
So what I will do is I will say average
of the abnormal returns for each of the stocks
on the announcement date.
So these two numbers, this is on the third stock.
And this is on the fourth stock.
And so let's see what we get.
So on average, the announcement at the return was 3.5%.
So clearly, the market interprets
this at the initiations or special
or increases in dividends as positive news.
Now, what I want to do next is I will
compute the same average abnormal returns on the days
around this announcement.
And let's see what we get.
So I will go 10 days before the announcement.

And I will also go down to 10 days after the announcement.
And I will extend just this number up and down.
And because everything here is symmetric in the file,
it's going to compute the average of the returns,
for example.
This would be the average of the returns on the day
before the announcement for these four stocks.
From this table, we could see that the return
on the announcement date itself is the highest.
Let us accumulate these returns and then
plot them to visually see how the market processes
this information.
So in this next column, I will compute
cumulative average of normal returns by doing the following.
For each day, we will add up returns
from day minus 10 all the way to this day, for example.
For day minus 8, we will add up the returns from minus 10
all the way to minus 8.
And so for us to effectively do it,
let's fix the top of this array so that we can simply
stretch this.
And then this would automatically
compute all of the returns all the way to the plus 10.
Now, I have plotted the cumulative average abnormal
return.
And this is how the chart looks like.
So we can clearly see that on the announcement date, day 0,
there is a strong positive return, again,
which is probably consistent with the fact
that this announcement of dividend increases
or special dividends on average interpreted as good news
for the future of these firms.
Importantly, we also do not see price drift
is tied in the positive or negative direction following
the announcement.
Therefore, this evidence is consistent
with semi-strong form market efficiency hypothesis, which
says that the prices react to information immediately,
and there is no way for us to earn abnormal trading profits
following the announcement.